The child cries out. Getting up in the dark You nurse softly, with infinite Evocative tenderness, and quietly return. Through half-slitted eyes I watch from the bed, Awaiting the nudge of your flexed body Settling by my side. In the doorway you pause. Looking strangely back you linger, Caught there, trembling between the crib of the child And the bed of the man. You are nude. As you gaze Your girl's body tilts on its axis of repose, The lithe waist, the taut belly and the narrow thighs; But above them those drooped, apple-ripe, youthfully maternal breasts Alive in the night. What can name the mystery, The blood-grace that hovers you? A power tore me out of the shut monastic mold At the peak of life and then, almost indifferently, Threw down my pride. I gaze on you covertly, half-feigning sleep, Impotent, the male intruder, stumbled on some archaic Female rite, stunned by the power that seized him there, But unable to claim it. Suddenly you stir. Like a questing otter, almost sensing my sight, You turn, hesitate, then noiselessly Glide back to bed. What was seen? I ask it now Only to probe the incidence Compressed within. From the depths of dream, At a child's cry, We woke to vision: Yours, but not to know. Mine, but not to keep.
Loneliness of city Christmas Eves  with real stars up there clear and stars on poles and wires across the street, and streaming cars all dark with parcels, home to families and the lighted window trees  I sat down in the bus beside him white jeans, black jerkin, slumped with head nodding in sleep, face hidden by long black hair, hands tattooed on the four fingers ADEN 1967 and on the right hand five Christian crosses. As the bus jerked, his hand fell on my knee, stayed there, lay heavily and alive with blue carvings from another world and seemed to hold me like a claw, unmoving. It moved. I rubbed my ear to steal a glance at him, found him stealing a glance at me. It was not the jerking of the bus, it was a proposition. He shook his hair back, and I saw his face for the first time, unshaven, hardman, a warning whether in Aden or Glasgow, but our eyes held while that blue hand burned into my leg. Half drunk, half sleeping but half what, half what? As his hand stirred again, my arm covered it while the bus jolted round a corner. &lsquo;Don't ge' aff tae ah ge' aff.&rsquo; But the conductor was watching, came up and shook him, looked at me. My ticket was up, I had to leave him sprawled there with that hand that now seemed so defenceless lying on the seat I had left. Half down the stair I looked back. The last thing I saw was Aden and five blue crosses for five dead friends. It was only fifteen minutes out of life but I feel as if I was lifted by a whirlwind and thrown down on some desert rocks to die of dangers as always far worse lost than run.
Two old crows sat on a fence rail. Two old crows sat on a fence rail, Thinking of effect and cause, Of weeds and flowers, And nature's laws. One of them muttered, one of them stuttered, One of them stuttered, one of them muttered. Each of them thought far more than he uttered. One crow asked the other crow a riddle. One crow asked the other crow a riddle: The muttering crow Asked the stuttering crow, &ldquo;Why does a bee have a sword to his fiddle? Why does a bee have a sword to his fiddle?&rdquo; &ldquo;Bee-cause,&rdquo; said the other crow, &ldquo;Bee-cause. B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B-cause.&rdquo; Just then a bee flew close to their rail:  &ldquo;Buzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz &wblank; zzzzzzzzz &wblank; zzzzzzzzzzzzzzz ZZZZZZZZ.&rdquo; And those two black crows Turned pale, And away those crows did sail. Why? B B B B B B B B B B B B B B-cause. B B B B B B B B B B B B B B-cause. &ldquo;Buzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz &wblank; zzzzzzzzzz &wblank; zzzzzzzzzzzzzz ZZZZZZZZ.&rdquo;
He starts with dates and ends with praise, Relates a subtle episode, Points a moral or turns a phrase On some historic formal code. The lights go out. Upon the screen Those masterpieces lie remote. What women in the nude are seen! What angels dressed, who walk or float On what mysterious hills or skies! He tells us that the lines vibrate, The colours clash or harmonise  Our education is too late. The fable here is in the Book. The legend there is from the Greek. We listen, strain our eyes to look, To grasp that ancient rhetoric. The final image, well explained, Is whisked away. We clap and leave. The habits of the eye, untrained, Are granted here a small reprieve.
Green rustlings, more-than-regal charities Drift coolly from that tower of whispered light. Amid the noontide's blazed asperities I watched the sun's most gracious anchorite Climb up as by communings, year on year Uneaten of the earth or aught earth holds, And the grey trunk, that's elephantine, rear Its frondings sighing in aetherial folds. Forever fruitless, and beyond that yield Of sweat the jungle presses with hot love And tendril till our deathward breath is sealed  It grazes the horizons, launched above Mortality ascending emerald-bright, A fountain at salute, a crown in view  Unshackled, casual of its azured height As though it soared suchwise through heaven too.
Through sun and shower, Through brake and bower, Through day and hour  I go my way; The wolf cannot stay me, The snake delay me, Nor the great bear waylay me:  I go my way. I ruffle the raven I harry the craven, In every haven  You find me at play. And light as a feather, Or heavy as leather, Through turncoat weather  I go my way. And swelling and lifting, And pausing and shifting, Caressing and drifting,  I go my way. You cannot bely me, You cannot defy me, You cannot deny me,  I go my way.
I shall go back again to the bleak shore And build a little shanty on the sand, In such a way that the extremest band Of brittle seaweed will escape my door But by a yard or two; and nevermore Shall I return to take you by the hand; I shall be gone to what I understand, And happier than I ever was before. The love that stood a moment in your eyes, The words that lay a moment on your tongue, Are one with all that in a moment dies, A little under-said and over-sung. But I shall find the sullen rocks and skies Unchanged from what they were when I was young.
<> And list to the love of these, She a window flower, And he a winter breeze. When the frosty window veil Was melted down at noon, And the cag&egrave;d yellow bird Hung over her in tune, He marked her through the pane, He could not help but mark, And only passed her by, To come again at dark. He was a winter wind, Concerned with ice and snow, Dead weeds and unmated birds, And little of love could know. But he sighed upon the sill, He gave the sash a shake, As witness all within Who lay that night awake. Perchance he half prevailed To win her for the flight From the firelit looking-glass And warm stove-window light. But the flower leaned aside And thought of naught to say, And morning found the breeze A hundred miles away.
Men who planned to be hermits, hoped to be saints, arrived in a round boat of wicker and skin at a pebbled cove. Behind them, dangerous leagues of mist and wave and behind those, a land belov'd and renounced. Before them, beyond the slope of stones and the massed green spears of iris, waited the island, habitation of birds and of spirits unknown, dwellers in mounds and hummocks. Under Columba's saltwashed toes, then jostled beneath sacks of provisions, and briefly hidden under the coracle brothers lifted to safety above the tideline, lay this stone, almost a seabirds' egg in form, in color a white that, placed upon white, is revealed as pearl grey. Now worn down by fourteen more centuries, its lustre perhaps has increased, as if moonlight, patiently blanching and stroking, had aided weather and water in its perfecting. Hold the stone in your palm: it fills it, warm when your need is for warmth, cool when you seek the touch of shadow. Its weight gives pleasure. One stone is not like another.
A two-year-old boy is a blossom in the intensive care aisle, small as a ball-bearing, round, open and smooth; for a month, in his first premature hours, his shaved head made him a mohawk Indian child, tubes the herbs for his nest, a collapsed lung the bulbous wing of a hawk. Slivered into each sole is an intravenous solution to balance his losses or what they take out for the lab; the blue spot on his spine is a birth mark of needle readings; the hardened thighs immune from 70 shots of various drugs of uneven depth; the chest is thick with congestion: bad air and mucus good air and pure oxygen; jerky pouch buffalo lungs  It does not surprise me when he waits patiently for his grandmother, over her five-hour painless operation; he has waited in his isolette before: the glow in his eyes is for himself, will and love: an exclamation of your name: &ldquo;
As I went in and out I heard pieces of the conversation The psychopath took her to a bootlegger. The boot- legger took them to Marion, and won &dollar;1000 in a poker game. Louie  He loves her, but he don't dare. They irritate each other like skin. At 8 o'clock in the morning he went back. She wasn't there. At 5 o'clock, in the evening, he wired her brother. At 12 she showed up: the bootlegger had got rid of the psychopath but he also made a nuisance of him- self, he wanted his pay. She has had bad days ever since, and Louie  Said this one, electrons sd that one, stars Tensors  now Louie And Eloise o how one remembers how all one's associates did likewise, did likewise, from Danvers to Greenpoint, from Danvers And Louie is from Louisiana, the marshes of men and women which turn out to be slots one can put the memories in and out But Eloise can't OH, I don't want to hear any more pieces
in the stree was betty r, with 5 kidz in the street was bett, ray, cripple man miss johnson and kidz missarlene, mis stokes miz slade, missus wilson, they all missus, but missus wilso she divorced, living with a hairy cat. in the feeling of the stree'song i heard beautiful ladies with wigs singin wigs with man holes and saucers cripple man raise his hand mouths yeh, all the babees we hear, cripple man sees all, and old mister turnhat. is there death in the red juice will the cores cause it lying silent as the dog army steps through patroling the street at night against fattyarbuckle the pimple carred face-rider, a dead poison feather (he lisp) sprawled under each new sun with the same dignity as their untouched turnds enormous artifacts like stones breathing before duhnoo cars comes
<> And the head of St. Gildas' savage abbey, Wrapped in thought as man can be, Pacing his cloister absently; Within, the mutinous gray monks, met Where no taper ever raised The blackness of the oubliette, Whisper, raging and amazed, How the lethal dish, though set For Abelard, had missed its way. They could only watch and pray. He might yet be graveward sent With poison in the Sacrament. And Abelard, the golden tongue Of student Paris and Corbeil, Guide of the insurgent young, By Soissons Synod forced to lay His book on fire, for that they Smelt Sabellian heresy,  Abelard, who ever taught The fierce integrity of thought, Walks his cloister musingly. But he does not think on these, Nor on peerless H&eacute;lo&iuml;se Single-souled enough to win Triumph at love's wakeful throne. Halfway love made his love sin. Piety he madly cast Over the exhausted past, A cloak like parchment dry and thin. He is true to thought alone. So he paces, challenging the dead. Augustine spake sooth? But St. Paul said Quite the opposite; if Gregory Wrote by inspiration, then Jerome Wrote by something else; they disagree. Athanasius here and Isidore There a contradiction  Heeding not love's scourge and doom's Behind, while cloudily before Excommunication looms, He walks his cloister musingly.
Seeing your hand on the doorknob when you said &ldquo;I see my hand on the knob waiting to go&rdquo; And knowing nothing (needing to stay where one is because the alternatives are dreadful Are public, vapid and of dubious outcome) I saw your hand turn inconclusively The brass doorknob in the fashion of someone leafing through a magazine While her mind is as they say in their precise measures a million miles away. At least in this house there is no one I can hurt by language or by silence And those are the only sins that are finally unforgivable aren't they the ones against telling Too much or too little or simply (as you know that, fingertips on such smooth rounded metal) The wrong thing. We will say the wrong thing (this also is the wrong thing to say) and the whole night Becomes an incurable platitude or a dinner where one is poisoned mildly And makes one's way home by cab half in tears thinking for some reason of that Lacedemonian boy who came home with a fox gnawing his guts out what can we do, These things are waiting for us in the world all the time for us to remember to be them.
I am going over my early rages again, my first laments and ecstasies, my old indictments and spiritualities. I am standing, like Schiller, in front of Auden's door waiting for his carved face to let me in. In my hand is  from one ruined continent to the other, all my feelings slipping out on the sidewalk. It was warm and hopeful in his small cave waiting for the right word to descend but it was cold and brutal outside on Fourth Street as I walked back to the Seventh Avenue subway, knowing, as I reached the crowded stairway, that I would have to wait for ten more years or maybe twenty more years for the first riches to come my way, and knowing that the stick of that old Prospero would never rest on my poor head, dear as he was with his robes and his books of magic, good and wise as he was in his wrinkled suit and his battered slippers.  Oh good and wise, but not enough to comfort me, so loving was he with his other souls. I had to wait like clumsy Caliban, a sucker for every vagueness and degeneration. I had to find my own way back, I had to free myself, I had to find my own pleasure in my own sweet cave, with my own sweet music. Once a year, later even once a month, I stood on the shores of Bleecker and Horatio waving good-bye to that ship all tight and yare and that great wizard, bobbing up and down like a dreaming sailor out there, disappearing just as he came, only this time his face more weary and his spirit more grave than when he first arrived to take us prisoner on our own small island, that poet I now could talk to, that wrinkled priest whose neck I'd hang on, that magician who could release me now, whom I release and remember.
Time is fleeting, time is fleeting,  Swiftly doth each moment fly Scarcely dawns the morn till even;  Short we live till we must die. Time is fleeting, time is fleeting,  As the waters seek the sea, So down life's stream we are drifted,  Till we reach eternity. Time is fleeting, time is fleeting,  Let not follies lure us on, And we waste our time with trifles,  Till the bloom of life is gone, Then with feeble steps and palsied,  Down life's stream with empty hands, Leaves no honor, leaves no title,  Print no footsteps in the sand. Let us estimate its value,  While we through life's journey go, Let us gather in our harvest,  Ere the winter comes with snow.
Dear Condor: Much thanks for that telephonic support from North Carolina when I suddenly went ape in the Iowa tulips. Lord, but I'm ashamed. I was afraid, it seemed, according to the doctor of impending success, winning some poetry prizes or getting a wet kiss. The more popular I got, the softer the soft cry in my head: Don't believe them. You were never good. Then I broke and proved it. Ten successive days I alienated women I liked best. I told a coed why her poems were bad (they weren't) and didn't understand a word I said. Really warped. The phrase &ldquo;I'll be all right&rdquo; came out too many unsolicited times. I'm o.k. now. I'm back at the primal source of poems: wind, sea and rain, the market and the salmon. Speaking of the market, they're having a vital election here. Save the market? Tear it down? The forces of evil maintain they're trying to save it too, obscuring, of course, the issue. The forces of righteousness, me and my friends, are praying for a storm, one of those grim dark rolling southwest downpours that will leave the electorate sane. I'm the last poet to teach the Roethke chair under Heilman. He's retiring after 23 years. Most of the old gang is gone. Sol Katz is aging. Who isn't? It's close now to the end of summer and would you believe it I've ignored the Blue Moon. I did go to White Center, you know, my home town, and the people there, many are the same, but also aging, balding, remarkably polite and calm. A man whose name escapes me said he thinks he had known me, the boy who went alone to Longfellow Creek and who laughed and cried for no reason. The city is huge, maybe three quarters of a million and lots of crime. They are indicting the former chief of police. Sorry to be so rambling. I eat lunch with J. Hillis Miller, brilliant and nice as they come, in the faculty club, overlooking the lake, much of it now filled in. And I tour old haunts, been twice to Kapowsin. One trout. One perch. One poem. Take care, oh wisest of condors. Love. Dick. Thanks again.
<> Goes her weedy wildwood way, Where with rosehip-buttoned coat, Cardinal flower-plume afloat, With the squirrel-folk at play, Brown September, smiling, stands, Chieftain of the Romany bands Of the Fall a gypsy crew, Glimmering in lobelia-blue, Gold and scarlet down the lands. Summer, with a redbird trill, Dares him follow at her will, There to romp in tree and vine, Drink the sunset's crimson wine, And on beauty feast his fill. He his Autumn whistle takes, And his dark hair backward shakes; Pipes a note, and bids her on,  Dancing like a woodland faun,  And she follows through the brakes. She must follow: she is bound By the wildness of the sound.  Is it love or necromance?  Down the world he leads the dance, And the woods go whirling round. Wildly briars clutch and hold; Branches reach out arms of gold; Naught can stay them. Pipe, and follow Over hill and over hollow Till the night fall dark and cold. Now her gown is torn in shreds, And her gossamer veil is threads Streaming round her nakedness; And the flowers, at her distress, Weep and hide their drooping heads. Round her whirl the frightened leaves, And the stammering water grieves; Nut and haw the forest throws At her as she dancing goes To the pipe that magic weaves. Death will have her. She must spin Till, a skeleton, she win To the land where Winter dwells, Where shall end Fall's gipsy spells, And her long white sleep begin.
These days the silence is immense. It is there deep down, not to be escaped. The twittering flight of goldfinches, The three crows cawing in the distance Only brush the surface of this silence Full of mourning, the long drawn-out Tug and sigh of waters never still  The ocean out there, and the inner ocean. Only animals comfort because they live In the present and cannot drag us down Into those caverns of memory full of loss. They pay no attention to the thunder Of distant waves. My dog's eager eyes Watch me as I sit by the window, thinking. At the bottom of the silence what lies in wait? Is it love? Is it death? Too early or too late? What is it I can have that I still want? My swift response is to what cannot stay, The dying daffodils, peonies on the way. Iris just opening, lilac turning brown In the immense silence where I live alone. It is the transient that touches me, old, Those light-shot clouds as the sky clears, A passing glory can still move to tears, Moments of pure joy like some fairy gold Too evanescent to be kept or told. And the cat's soft footfall on the stair Keeps me alive, makes Nowhere into Here. At the bottom of the silence it is she Who speaks of an eternal Now to me.
The huddled egg breaks open, new leaves move on the tree   for Lord Lucky   his cup runneth over bearing out the big-bowl reading of happiness ...    blind trust beaks through the warm shell  while fear trembles the tree    for Lord Lucky a claw slices down   beside the hand cupped around his child. Of what use plunder  to prisoners of war? Hemp dangling fruit by the outworks. Across a wide famine   birdcatchers  drag at the wind, men try drumming  bream to the surface, their rafts adrift on a fast current, O Lord   Lucky!    Mayflies thronging the air.
I wish that I had the power  To dedicate this chapter, There's not a single hour,  My soul it don't enrapture. I wish I knew just what to say,  To introduce this part; Its on my mind both night and day,  It penetrates my heart. I wish I had the children here,  Well, then I couldn't write; My mind would be in such a cheer,  My heart in such a flight  That I would not believe my eyes, That I was not in Paradise.
Lady of Silence from the winsome cage of thy body rose through the sensible night a quick bird (tenderly upon the dark's prodigious face thy voice scattering perfume-gifted wings suddenly escorts with feet sun-sheer the smarting beauty of dawn)
Heaven won't have to do with its multitudes. There isn't room enough. A thought we've all had perhaps, now taken beyond that consideration. Last night I saw several people in a dream, in shapes of all of this: faces and hands, and things to say, too. I love you, one said. And I love you too. Let's get out of this. One said: I have to take a piss. The door to the pantry was dark, where the two crouched, his hand on her back, her hand on his back. I looked at an evil, in the face. I saw its place, in the universe, and laughed back until my mind cracked.
In those first years I came down often to the frog pond formerly, before the earthen dam wore away, the farm pond to bathe, standing on a rock and throwing pond water over me, and doing it quickly because of the leeches, who need but minutes to know you're there, or to read the mail or to scribble or to loaf and think sometimes of the future  while the one deer fly that torments everyone who walks in July in Vermont smack it dead as often as one will buzzed about my head. A few years after I got here, the beavers came, the waters rose, and the frog pond became the beaver pond. The next year an old rowboat surfaced, with sheet metal nailed all around it to hold the hull boards in place while they rotted. The four of us would oar, pole, and bale out a few feet above the sunken green bank where a man used to sit and think and look up and seem to see four people up here oaring and poling and baling out above him: the man  the two children laugh and splash, a slight shadow crosses the woman's face. Then one spring the beavers disappeared  trapped off, or else gone away on their own to make a pond elsewhere  in which case this pond and that one and the next, one after one, will flow off, each leaving behind its print in the woods, a sudden green meadow with gleams of sky meandering through it. The man who lies propped up on an elbow, scribbling in a notebook or loafing and thinking, will be older and will remember this place held a pond once, writhing with leeches and overflown by the straight blue bodies of dragonflies, and will think of small children grown up and of true love broken and will sit up abruptly and swat the hard-biting deer fly on his head, crushing it into his hair, as he has done before.
God help us Smoke! -Forget that. Look at the damp. These are the ordinary fears  of anyone moving house approaching a poor lamp  for students in miserable outskirts. -Isn't there even a tree  for the children? What sort of landlord will we have? Too strict?  in a necklace of coins, a porter impervious as fate  to the shudder in our pockets. What kind of neighbour?  Unmarried? Perhaps not noisy? The old place was no pleasure  but still the air there breathed our atmosphere, was soaked  in our own odours. Easy, to put up with fetid air  if it isn't soiled by outsiders! It was old, of course, and  rotting, but still ... Not a hostel room! I don't know about being born  but this is for dying in!
I cannot but remember When the year grows old  October November  How she disliked the cold! She used to watch the swallows Go down across the sky, And turn from the window With a little sharp sigh. And often when the brown leaves Were brittle on the ground, And the wind in the chimney Made a melancholy sound, She had a look about her That I wish I could forget  The look of a scared thing Sitting in a net! Oh, beautiful at nightfall The soft spitting snow! And beautiful the bare boughs Rubbing to and fro! But the roaring of the fire, And the warmth of fur, And the boiling of the kettle Were beautiful to her! I cannot but remember When the year grows old  October November  How she disliked the cold!
May it be that one morning given to me in this garden the pack and walking stick, the boot with taped inner heel, will carry foot only, bread and four-color map, and go with me unburdened of agitation to the edge of Flussturheim. There, not the copper beech surging from cobbles, that plume burnishing the black root's force while thrusting sun away, not that but its double will fill the air there, silver-pale, exhaling the rustle of the latch in the door-catch to the beyond. And I shall not startle, for near that trunk rises the gurgle of the fountain of recollection, in Flussturheim. Surge and relieving source. And I shall drink there before coming to the low parapet belting town from river. May it be that the haze will burn off, and the confluence shine through beneath the notch, with its ford where one king was slashed while crossing, and the murderer became another king, but only the toppled man hero. For it will be there, under potato gardens, tilted vines, by the toll bridge open now to free passage, that heroes will have set out for the crossing, leaving the moon foliage of passion's copper, and entered into a plane of the far garden. Below on the stone span, in blooded homespun, a girl hooded alone at mid-arch, market basket on the rail quite empty, her inscrutable gaze filling with the same green that I might be conning and the identical hill line, but altered by their having berthed long in her, refinding their way down her stem of quiet, along meilinated quick to the remakings ithin rootlets that surpass undoings and the suck downward, force that rivers reversion but makes of return a tower. She will not be waiting there for one of the heroes. Nor will they pass there, processionally relinquished, not in Flussturheim, where they have ridden out already and left the years channeled and tapering towards rapids, years that were, and that are, years in eye and in heart going down and she will close one over the other, and go out on a fire-cut path of seeing, as its live tendril, past moored flat-bottoms square at prow and stern aslosh with gold-pale leaves, and the azure-backed kingfisher bursting from shoreline shrubs, along her own corridor, through the harshly oncoming, oh my girl.
His heatless room the watcher of the stars Nightly inhabits when the night is clear; Propping his mattress on the turning sphere, Saturn his rings or Jupiter his bars He follows, or the fleeing moons of Mars, Till from his ticking lens they disappear ... Whereat he sighs, and yawns, and on his ear The busy chirp of Earth remotely jars. Peace at the void's heart through the wordless night, A lamb cropping the awful grasses, grazed; Earthward the trouble lies, where strikes his light At dawn industrious Man, and unamazed Goes forth to plough, flinging a ribald stone At all endeavour alien to his own.
Sundays too my father got up early and put his clothes on in the blueblack cold, then with cracked hands that ached from labor in the weekday weather made banked fires blaze. No one ever thanked him. I'd wake and hear the cold splintering, breaking. When the rooms were warm, he'd call, and slowly I would rise and dress, fearing the chronic angers of that house, Speaking indifferently to him, who had driven out the cold and polished my good shoes as well. What did I know, what did I know of love's austere and lonely offices?
In front of a log fire in Cumbria a Doctor from New Zealand has just said &lsquo;I went to see a 3-D movie once but I sat in the front row and I didn't see any of the film because it all went on behind my back.&rsquo; The word Ha is issuing from the mouth of a German girl who is sitting next to the Doctor from New Zealand. It is followed by the word Ha. I went to see a 3-D movie once but I sat in the front row and I didn't see any of the film because it all went on behind my back. The log speaks: I would rather burn in a fire than hear this. I would rather be fashioned into a bookend than hear this. I would rather be sawdust than hear this. The Doctor speaks: I went to see a 3-D movie once but I sat in the front row and I didn't see any of the film because it all went on behind my back. Someone writes in a visitors' book: I enjoyed myself very much. The food was superb. The company was good. I have not got enough space to tell you how much I love staying here. The shin of a dead man speaks: Take these chains from my heart and set me free. The German girl speaks: Ha Ha.
It was no place for the faithless, so I felt a little odd walking the marshland with my daughters, Canada geese all around and the blue herons just standing there, safe, and the abundance of swans. The girls liked saying the words, gosling, egret, whooping crane, and they liked when I agreed. The casinos were a few miles to the east. I liked saying craps and croupier and sometimes I wanted to be lost in those bright windowless ruins. It was early April, the gnats and black flies weren't out yet. The mosquitoes hadn't risen from their stagnant pools to trouble paradise and to give us the great right to complain. I loved these girls. The world beyond Brigantine awaited their beauty and beauty is what others want to own. I'd keep that to myself. The obvious was so sufficient just then. Sandpiper. Red-wing blackbird. &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; I said. But already we were near the end. Praise refuge, I thought. Praise whatever you can.
Under the glaze of the afternoon sun her room lightens. The doctor is packing his instruments. And mother, posing her gown, is remote; sitting on the windowsill, she pours water on a flower. Once, she tells the doctor, my husband rushed across the room and pressed a rose in my hand. In the yard, our calm, childlike faces look back. We watch her green gown beating the window and the white casement. A spot of paint on a wall of canvas: the flower is the secret we have shared for years. We are like our father's paintings of acrobats. Deaf and silent, we throw up our hands.
Waiting to whimper or for Messiah it doesn't matter much if I wait in the jury room of the Criminal Courts Building until the prosecutor challenges me again because I don't believe in  or if like yesterday I hover eight miles high until the iron roc descends it doesn't matter where. In between is better than whence I came or where I go to be with my headache alone in purgatory. Here watchfully I wend and wander through the wonderful landscape of Pains where unexpectedly the ache-trees in the grove blossom into flowers and small birds murmuring hop from twinge to twinge. Oh the days have vanished quickly by during which I made a library of useful thoughts for the Americans and became a famous man; but the one empty night of torment in which I do not fall asleep is when I write the poem that says how my life was.
Moored in his favourite Eastern port, This jolly British Admiral Must give a party on his ship, With jolly guests, Malays, Chinese, And Indians and English too. Says he, &lsquo;I like the sarong well, Trim gear, I wear it when I can.&rsquo; Good Jack, who likes Malay costume! Approval flutters like the gulls, Down go the drinks, up come the words. &lsquo;Although,&rsquo; he says,' &lsquo;it tends to slip, It slips and slides below my hips, It's hard to keep a sarong up.&rsquo; A Chinese lady speaks, sedate And sweet. &lsquo;Then Admiral you need A songkok.&rsquo; Songkok as you know Is headwear proper to sarong. But Admiral and nearby guests, They do not know what songkok is, They think they hear some other words. Some gape, some giggle and some gasp, And jolly shaken Jack withdraws Upon his bridge, and all disperse. This Chinese lady at a loss, She asks her spouse in Mandarin, But what, but why? Who, unbeknown, Now scouts about the huddled groups. Then joins his wife. &lsquo;Ah me, my dear,&rsquo; He murmurs in their tongue, &lsquo;To keep His sarong up they thought you said  The Admiral needs a strong &rsquo; &lsquo;For shame!&rsquo; in spotless Mandarin This well-bred lady cries, &lsquo;Oh filthy- Minded foreign hounds! Oh deep disgrace! What can they think of Chinese dames, These British gentlemen? Away!&rsquo; So Admiral is hurt, Malays Offended, English persons shocked, And Chinese lady hates the lot. Weigh anchor, jolly Admiral  Let drop these oriental tricks, Be stayed with buttons and gold braid!
The Lord God smiled  At the mild words As He heard St Francis  Preach to the birds. Preach of a tree  With berries on, That a woman ate  And gave to a man; The juice was sweet  But tart the core, No herb in field  Their gripes could cure; But another tree  Grew redder fruit, And there God grafted  The antidote. Sparrow and starling,  Jackdaw and rook Perched on slates  And chimney stack. Tits trapezed  Upon the spouts, Starlings dropped lime  Like marguerites. They sang to the saint  With scornful beak: &lsquo;The berries give   No bellyache. 'But the pips split  And sprout in man, And through the thighs  The roots grow down.&rsquo; The Lord God laughed  At the wild fancies As He heard the birds  Preach to St Francis.
Barricades hammered into place, the beams stake out in broad daylight to avert nothing they've taken; the old second floor where they write the checks, synchronize the grades, or type in correct places a stream data prognosis is taken in the night; the magpies are around, around the corporate desk. The blacks are studying the records kept, memorizing the numbers, tallying the secret exits, remembering the names, the window pipes, outside, for the way down. They've gotten up there with Frederick Douglass in a six hour duel with the overseers, the first confrontation to his own man; DuBois in Atlanta looking at the fingers toes of meat market Sam; and Malcolm in his first act crumbling his prison and the bullet proof glass. Someone is having a familiar vision of the black-white syndrome in the academic halls; in the cigar smoke one hears the full-bull rhesis rhetoric and the black Christmas in the halls of ivy: the barricades come down
While wrapt in wonder and their evening wraps a swill select mouth through  (&dollar;ewing Machine? No Singer sang and Duncan danced the Reaper through McCormack's Mary's Garden) &ldquo;Cow louse ally colossaler cow louse all had Wagner, too, not been too harnessed to two wives, as pictures are to reproductive function.&rdquo; Men ken no wiser thin Menckeres menckenizers chicks of the Hofbrau Eaglet caged in costumer's plush zippers with one green carnation who (pontificating in the men's can) patters like a bungled Bunthorne from home-baked broadcast recordings of primordial mud: &ldquo;Fine Arts are less ideal than Poetry. Poetry and Religion defeat God. Poetry turning Music attains Beauty. The trouble with the Arts is they lack movement. One picture is a bar of Scriabin. Music demands, of all the Arts, the most training. The next harder is Modern Architecture. Greek Architecture was a cinch, merely Design. Pictures like womenkind should kindly make no comment. &ldquo;Palaeolithic painting's not as phono,  as phorno, I mean as photographic lenses. Poet, try turning moo sick, attain booty. In a pitcher, a boo full stricture were a chore. The next harder is moderne arch itch texture. One picture makes one bar of Screech-have-been. The trouble with all farts is they lack movement. Moo sick demands of all the utmost straining. No fart is more ideal than Poetry. Poet, try and religion Gawd.&rdquo;
as earth, light and grass illustrate the meadow, there's a natural grace I hope for that unknowing a poem may show having its life in a field of rapture, a book made full of days (pages), a ready effort full of all places then that may be because I have loved them part-song of companions and of those unknown, alike in soul. For them may there be a special green and flowering of life in these words  eager to be read, taken, yielded to. Yes, though I contrive the mind's measure and wrest doctrine from old lore, it's to win particular hearts, to stir an abiding affection for this music, as if a host of readers will join the Beloved ready to dance with me, it's for the unthinking ready thing I'm writing these poems.
Now on this out of season afternoon Day schools which cater for the sort of boy Whose parents go by Pullman once a month To do a show in town, pour out their young Into the sharply red October light. Here where The Drive and Buckhurst Road converge I watch the rival gangs and am myself A schoolboy once again in shivering shorts. I see the dust of sherbet on the chin Of Andrew Knox well-dress'd, well-born, well-fed, Even at nine a perfect gentleman, Willie Buchanan waiting at his side  Another Scot, eruptions on his skin. I hear Jack Drayton whistling from the fence Which hides the copper domes of &ldquo;Cooch Behar&rdquo;. That was the signal. So there's no escape. A race for Willow Way and jump the hedge Behind the Granville Bowling Club? Too late. They'll catch me coming out in Seapink Lane. Across the Garden of Remembrance? No, That would be blasphemy and bring bad luck. Well then, I'm  He pinions me in that especial grip His brother learned in Kob&euml; from a Jap (No chance for me against the Japanese). Willie arrives and winds me with a punch Plum in the tummy, grips the other arm. &ldquo;You're to be booted. Hold him steady, chaps!&rdquo; A wait for taking aim. Oh trees and sky! Then crack against the column of my spine, Blackness and breathlessness and sick with pain I stumble on the asphalt. Off they go Away, away, thank God, and out of sight So that I lie quite still and climb to sense Too out of breath and strength to make a sound.  Now over Polegate vastly sets the sun; Dark rise the Downs from darker looking elms, And out of Southern railway trains to tea Run happy boys down various Station Roads, Satchels of homework jogging on their backs, So trivial and so healthy in the shade Of these enormous Downs. And when they're home, When the Post-Toasties mixed with Golden Shred Make for the kiddies such a scrumptious feast, Does Mum, the Persil-user, still believe That there's no Devil and that youth is bliss? As certain as the sun behind the Downs And quite as plain to see, the Devil walks.
God germed in raw granite, source-glimpsed in stone? Or imaged out in the black-flamed Onyx-open line, smoldered in the tortured Free-flow of lava, the igneous Instant of conception? As maiden-form Swells in the heaviness of wold, sleeps Rumped and wanton-bulged in the boulder's Bulk, is shaped in tree-forms everywhere As any may see: dropped logs, say, or those crotched Trunks pronged like a reckless nymph Head-plunged into the earth so Godhood Wakes under water, shape-lurked, or grave and somber, Where sea falls, mocks through flung foam.... Ghost! Can this be? Breather of elemental truths, She stirs, she coaxes! Out of my heart's howk, Out of my soul's wild wrath I make oath! In my emptiness These arms gall for her, bride's mouth, Spent-breathed in laughter, or that night's First unblushing revealment, the flexed Probity of the flesh, the hymen-hilted troth, We closed, we clung on it, the stroked And clangorous rapture! I am dazed. Is this she? Woman within! Can this be? Do we, His images, float Time-spun on that vaster drag His timelessness evokes? In the blind heart's core, when we Well-wedded merge, by Him Twained into one and solved there, Are these still three? Are three So oned, in the full-forthing (Heart's reft, the spirit's great Unreckonable grope, and God's Devouring splendor in the stroke) are we  This all, this utterness, this terrible Total truth indubitably He?
<>  And everywhere he wandered he was blessed Out of all ancient men my childhood knew  I choose him and I mark him for the best. Of all authoritative liars, too,  I crown him loveliest. How fondly I remember the delight  That always glorified him in the spring; The joyous courage and the benedight  Profusion of his faith in everything! He was a good old man, and it was right  That he should have his fling. And often, underneath the apple-trees,  When we surprised him in the summer time, With what superb magnificence and ease  He sinned enough to make the day sublime! And if he liked us there about his knees,  Truly it was no crime. All summer long we loved him for the same  Perennial inspiration of his lies; And when the russet wealth of autumn came,  There flew but fairer visions to our eyes  Multiple, tropical, winged with a feathery flame,  Like birds of paradise. So to the sheltered end of many a year  He charmed the seasons out with pageantry Wearing upon his forehead, with no fear,  The laurel of approved iniquity. And every child who knew him, far or near,  Did love him faithfully.
We are stretched to meet a new dimension Of love, a more demanding range Where despair and hope must intertwine. How grow to meet it? Intention Here can neither move nor change The raw truth. Death is on the line. It comes to separate and estrange Lover from lover in some reckless design. Where do we go from here? Fear.Fear.Fear.Fear. Our world has never been more stark Or more in peril. It is very lonely now in the dark. Lonely and sterile. And yet in the simple turn of a head Mercy lives. I heard it when someone said &ldquo;I must go now to a dying friend. Every night at nine I tuck him into bed, And give him a shot of morphine,&rdquo; And added, &ldquo;I go where I have never been.&rdquo; I saw he meant into a new discipline He had not imagined before, and a new grace. Every day now we meet it face to face. Every day now devotion is the test. Through the long hours, the hard, caring nights We are forging a new union. We are blest. As closed hands open to each other Closed lives open to strange tenderness. We are learning the hard way how to mother. Who says it is easy? But we have the power. I watch the faces deepen all around me. It is the time of change, the saving hour. The word is not fear, the word we live, But an old word suddenly made new, As we learn it again, as we bring it alive: Love.Love.Love.Love.
&lsquo;It's late so soon,&rsquo; he said  The sun still high but the day nearly over, The weed at July and summer toppling. Away in the intake, The scaled-out grass sprawled sodden, the ewes wanted clipping, And the lambs were as big as their mothers. He stared across the dale. On its eastern shoulder every cobble and cint Was seven-times magnified under the lens of light; The other slope was plunged in a reservoir of shadow. Bracken, rank and viscous, stank like compost, The rowans were already reddening, And the rag-mat of autumn lay coiled up in the corries, Waiting to be rolled out over fell-foot and byre. He pushed segged thumbs through hair too early grey, And said again: &lsquo;That's the trouble with summer  It's late so soon.&rsquo;
Tenderly, in those times, as though she fed An ailing child with sturdy propping up Of its small, feverish body in the bed, And steadying of its hands about the cup  She gave her husband of her body's strength, Thinking of men, what helpless things they were, Until he turned and fell asleep at length, And stealthily stirred the night and spoke to her. Familiar, at such moments, like a friend, Whistled far off the long, mysterious train, And she could see in her mind's vision plain The magic World, where cities stood on end ... Remote from where she lay and yet between, Save for something asleep beside her, only the window screen.
There is a table bountifully spread. In the full sunlight when there is no cloud And under cloudy skies, And when there are no stars and when the stars Distill the time, the table stands in a field. It is late morning and the service shines. The guests have wandered from the company. The Lord is alone. It is good to hear The voice of the Lord at rest in his solitude. The guests have wandered from the table set, But they hear the voice of the Lord at rest: The song of the Lord in solitude goes up, Ten times enfolded, blue, and saturate With law to the heavens at noon of gaze, And down among the graves and the darker animals. The song of the Lord indicates the dust Of the roadway, the random hammer of the sea, The riddled vase of mind and mind's dependencies And pain lost otherwise and lost in this. The voice of the Lord opens the gates of day. Air streams through our eyes and brushes the pupils Streams through our eyes and this is how we see.
<> A night spent in watching Night. A half-wing of thought lifted And drifted Out. Thought in answer to awareness Of thought in awareness Of night. She is the sphinx with stretched eyes, And the coiled blue of her hair flies At the moon. The weight of her lips pressed and pressed On the heads of the blessed Half-dead, She speaks, and her words are the mumblings Of the infinite to the jumblings Of the dead. She is a deep-bosomed she-cat watching The sun with green eyes watching The night. The dark trees shiver at the paleness Of the dead-awake, pressed in frailness Out, And they grow hushed within themselves As the dead-awake wander within themselves Out. She is the sphinx with stretched eyes, Stretched green at the corners, and she lies In desolation.
yesterday was another one of the last days left on earth but who's counting this string of pearls? who'd want to those my thoughts as I hobbled trying out my homemade shoes again in the new valley of dolls down canon perdido street way where in this gray a.m. the men are already lined up outside the state assistance office with (at this late date) not even the appearance of false cheerfulness left So I make it around the corner there's a guy lying face up to the sky on city sidewalk wino I guess with bottle in paper bag only out like a light or some dead amigo on slab in city morgue &ldquo;Don't be afraid&rdquo; I told myself afterward limping away &ldquo;to go down deep and blow upwards from there, to the Lord, like a diver in shit ocean ...&rdquo; talking to myself these days ... &ldquo;Reach down to your toes and know and know how deep it goes ...&rdquo; kinda humming it &ldquo;down past the pink notes to where they get blue outa squids&rdquo;... I crossed Carrillo... &ldquo;nobody down there know your name nobody down there know you and you know the real sound you get (that moan) is the one you pull out of looking up at the bottom all the time, anyhow besides&rdquo; but it didn't help
Reine sir&egrave;ne d'or sun running east under Waterloo Bridge (entrancing aged trees that lean over the parapet like old men smiling  at a golden-haired barmaid) reine sir&egrave;ne d'or abdicates into shadows. In Piccadilly Circus buses balance themselves on the slippery plank they themselves have greased with light. Lit cigar-ends draw sagging phosphorescent telegraph wires past Appenrodt's, round by the Monico, past the Pavilion. Gymnastic of comets rococo euclid in fire Deauville, Schweppes, Gordon's Gin!
I do not live by the sea but I have A friend who lives by the sea. On him The wind sheds images of the far shore When he walks in the wind. On me the wind Does not shed images, but I know of The far shore because he tells me of it. Where he walks the Monarchs in their season Come across tacking and swooping over The wave crests from the far shore, and then over The salt marsh and the sea grass, one by one Battering toward sleep in the Sierra Madre. Also whole days come to him on the wind To which he gives a name, such as Storm Day Or Wash Day or Death Day. He marks each one With a clear mark, a term. In Winter he Takes account of the six wings of the snow. On the far shore where gulls nest in the clearness Of his thinking are treasuries of snow And the wild horns from which spill butterflies. I love my markman who lives by the sea On whom the winds shed images he knows I love him for the waking and for the time, The whole days, and for the Monarch on the Wind road to the mother mountain of sleep.
Say you're drunk or drugged and something hums far off. A factory. A storm. The sound reminds you how you thought life would be, Fresno, alone, thirty years back on a mountain outside town, green valley flaring away below you like a tune, Oberon's slow death in  You think about time, how your life runs down one year each day of passing sky. Clouds tear overhead. A woman dead is a lot of women, starting with cranes. Say you're clear and sober and something hums far off. A carousel. A flume. The sound says you keep dying like a song and being revived. The sound says you keep being reviewed like a movie hit, the critics trying to explain huge crowds across the land. What to Butte says something vital also to New York? Perhaps the killing at the end. You want her dead after the rotten things she did. No. That was El Paso and the mongoloid in the sideshow frowned and batted her beads. Say this: you're living alone and the hum has stopped. Ten years of silence. Ten years of hammering reruns and your cry directed at no one morning to night. You cook enough soup to live through July. You phone every day. Old films projected on your wall are grainy and jerk. You can't sleep. Then, one morning, the hum starts. You run to the door and shout at the sky, &ldquo;I'm here.&rdquo; Dead women hum alive on your lawn. The sky slows down. You win thirty more years.
<> Of ghostly harbors that it touched at dawn, Of blue lagoons where lifted beauty burns, Shore lines towards which its wooden spars have gone. There is a rumor of disastrous days And nights by quiet islands near a town, Of wine-red hills, beyond the waterways Where both the moon and lovely stars looked down. Now do they dream beneath the April sky Of olden time and golden circumstance, Of ancient summers, ended like a dance, And mad adventures, now a memory. A secret flower lying on their breast The wind dropped down upon an old, old quest.
The sight of him could not have failed to tease The tender chisel of Praxiteles. But he's maths's achievement more than art's: His body adds up, the sum of its parts. He flaunts his disproportionate erection As if to violate the Golden Section. He seizes it in one proficient hand Like the Red Baron coming in to land. He clenches eyelids, fists and arsehole tight As if he has to come with all his might. He breathes not a word, but a shape the word Might take in order to emerge unheard. Yet evidence of loving hardly lingers Longer than the threads of semen on his fingers. His presence radiates through cheap cologne The finer essence of testosterone. Botanic, fragrant as the hanging gardens Of Babylon, his florid cock unhardens. I cherish his pelvis, mother-of-pearled With sperm: another wonder of the world.
Orchard-lipped, loose-jointed, purplish, indolent flowers, with a ripe smell of peaches, like a girl's breath through lipstick, delicate and coarse in the weedlap of late summer rivers, dishevelled, weak-stemmed, common as brambles, as love which subtracts us from seasons, their courtships and murders, ( between blossom and violent blossom, meticulous spiders repeated in gossamer, and the slim males waiting). Fragrance too rich for keeping, too light to remember, like grief for the cat's sparrow and the wild gull's beach-hatched embryo. (She ran from the reaching water with the broken egg in her hand, but the clamped bill refused brandy and grubs, a shred too naked and perilous for life, offered freely in cardboard boxes, little windowsill coffins for bird death, kitten death, squirrel death, summer repeated and ended in heartbreak, in sad small funerals.) Sometimes, shaping bread or scraping potatoes for supper, I have stood in the kitchen, transfixed by what I'd call love, if love were a whiff, a wanting for no particular lover, no child, or baby, or creature. `Love, dear love,' I could cry to these scent-spilling ragged flowers, and mean nothing but `no', in that word's breath, to their evident going, their important descent through red towering stalks to the riverbed. It's not, as I thought, that death creates love. More that love knows death. Therefore tears, therefore poems, therefore long stone sobs of cathedrals that speak to no ferret or fox, that prevent no massacre. (I am combing abundant leaves from these icy shallows.) Love, it was you who said, &lsquo;Murder the killer we have to call life and we'd be a bare planet under a dead sun.&rsquo; Then I loved you with the usual soft lust of October that says &lsquo;yes&rsquo; to the coming winter and a summoning odour of balsam.
A woman pours water from a yellow rubber pail, gives water to plants receptive as children. Cornered, I watch from the floor where on my belly, twice as long as children on either side, I blink at the future. Do they hear it, the children, as I do, water gurgling down to the roots, the blind shove of the numinous thin tendrils with no dream of wind or dark ice? Three of us lift a blank face that drones over the track of momentary hope, but we are not speaking about roots clamped in blind pots where any hand, if it wanted to, could make a sound like love. We have just heard of despair, engines, a climb as sweet as water.
Clouds' silent shadows passing across the Sun above Teton's mountaintop I saw on LSD Movies dead shadows ocean 40&percent; dead said expert J. Cousteau A.D. 1968 Shakespeare the magician, Rimbaud visionary dead silent vamp Alla Nazimova's corpse-lip black dust Walt Disney of Mickey Mouse, Buck Rogers in the Twenty-fifth Century, Hollywood lost in shade Tragedian Sophocles passed this shore with Charon thru Styx Ex-Emperor Napoleon obituaried in 1821 Queen Liliuokalani giv'n to her reward Chief Joseph buried on a brown hill in Washington State General Douglas MacArthur urged atombombs to blow up China Eisenhower &amp; Xerxes led armies to the grave The Skeleton Man in 1930 Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus' Freakshow bony in's coffin The mother Cat I played with in the basement Paterson New Jersey when I was ten with the Lindbergh baby kidnapped found in a swamp of laundry My father's grave writ &ldquo;Answer a riddle with a stone&rdquo; wet with rain in Newark Jesus Christ &amp; Mary for all their Assumption, dust in this world Buddha relieved of his body, empty vehicle parked noiseless Allah the Word in a book, or muezzin cry on a Tower Not even Moses reached Promised Land, went down to Sheol. Tickertape for heroes, clods of dirt for forgotten grandpas  Television ghosts still haunt living room &amp; bed chamber Crooner Bing Crosby, Elvis Presley rock'n'roll Star, Groucho Marx a mus- tached joker, Einstein invented the universe, Naomi Ginsberg Com- munist Muse, Isadora Duncan dancing in diaphanous scarves Jack Kerouac noble Poet, Jimmy Dean mystic actor, Boris Karloff the old Frankenstein, Celebrities &amp; Nonentities set apart, absent from their paths shadows left behind, breathing no more  These were the musings of Buddhist student Allen Ginsberg.
Inadequate illumination In the Museum of Tomb Paintings Sarcophagus like big xerox machine Everything vaguely Egyptian Book of the Dead-ish Three hooded figures Two women and a taller Bearded man in between I keep running into them In my copy shop of the soul dream They sing together gravely chanting The song is copied on tape And mechanically transcribed In the baby book of my fate Which I get kept from reading.
In Murray, Kentucky I lay once On my side, the ghost-weight of a past life in my arms, A life not mine. I know she was there, Asking for nothing, heavy as bad luck, still waiting to rise. I know now and I lift her. Evening becomes us. I see myself in a tight dissolve, and answer to no one. Self-traitor, I smuggle in The spider love, undoer and rearranger of all things. Angel of Mercy, strip me down. This world is a little place, Just red in the sky before the sun rises. Hold hands, hold hands That when the birds start, none of us is missing. Hold hands, hold hands.
Moist warm towels at my face smell queerly ... chill me.... I am afraid.... ... Unguents smoothed into my face like yellow silk over my forehead. ... smoothed into cheek into hollow. Spasm ... Stress ... Pain ... Pressure of keen sweet tears from the lachrymals. Brows Nose Cheek Chin exploring ... murmuring ... pulsing.... Body waiting ... yearning ... dreading ... Again ... Ecstatic ... Eyes shut, Body shut, Muscles tense, Ecstasy like a kiss ... the touch of hated hands.... Moist warm towels at my face smell queerly ... chill me.... Cold wet towels burn me ... their smell of death.
To raise an iron tree Is a wooden irony, But to cause it to sail In a clean perpetual way Is to play Upon the spaces of the scale. Climbing the stairs we say, Is it work or is it play? Alexander Calder made it Work and play: Leaves that will never burn But were fired to be born, Twigs that are stiff with life And bend as to the magnet's breath, Each segment back to back, The whole a hanging burst of flak. Still the base metals, Touched by autumnal paint Fall through no autumn But, turning, feint In a fall beyond trees, Where forests are not wooded, There is no killing breeze, And iron is blooded.
Your presence is hungry and highpitched, the note of nails screed down a blackboard snatching the backbone in a fist of quills. You hear it yourself and want to escape frantic and headlong, a wasp in a jamjar. Under the nightshade of a parasol, light lacquered mauve and gold, you summon friends in prison or overdosed and dead without their lady of the lamp. You've lost count of the times you've given the kiss of life; still working as a local pool attendant, weren't you once a lifeguard by the ocean? Airmails come from the home you left behind you but the past you can't put there it plagues you like a swarm of a hornets, a coiffure of fire. Your dealers use the tradesman's entrance. Then you wear a halo of candyfloss, a glutinous helmet, lighter than air. Coming down, you long to be forgiven and forget. And the next morning crashes into you.
Lovely dainty Spanish needle With your yellow flower and white, Dew bedecked and softly sleeping, Do you think of me to-night? Shadowed by the spreading mango, Nodding o'er the rippling stream, Tell me, dear plant of my childhood, Do you of the exile dream? Do you see me by the brook's side Catching crayfish 'neath the stone, As you did the day you whispered: Leave the harmless dears alone? Do you see me in the meadow Coming from the woodland spring With a bamboo on my shoulder And a pail slung from a string? Do you see me all expectant Lying in an orange grove, While the swee-swees sing above me, Waiting for my elf-eyed love? Lovely dainty Spanish needle, Source to me of sweet delight, In your far-off sunny southland Do you dream of me to-night?
she, walla (queen) anderson miss booker t. washington jr. high of 1957, miss chicago bar maid of 1961 had her first abortion at 32 after giving birth to john (pee wee) jackson at 14, mary smith at 15 and a half, janice wilson at 17, dion jones at 19, sara jones at 21, and richard (cream) johnson at 27. on a sun-filled day during her 32nd year after as many years of aborting weak men who would not stand behind their own creations she walla (queen) anderson by herselfalonewithout consultation went under the western butchers to get her insides out.
At God's word David's kinsmen cast through Canaan: It was understood the king was dying as they said outright so that my father turned to me saying <> to which I answered <> as I remembered So the sun rose from his shoulders: blue air, the desert, the small yellowing village When I see myself it is still as I was then, beside the well, staring into the hollowed gourd half filled with water, where the dark braid grazing the left shoulder was recorded though the face was featureless of which they did not say <> <> They took me as I was. Not one among the kinsmen touched me, not one among the slaves. No one will touch me now. In the recurring dream my father stands at the doorway in his black cassock telling me to choose among my suitors, each of whom will speak my name once until I lift my hand in signal. On my father's arm I listen for not three sounds:  but two:  I tell you if it is my own will binding me I cannot be saved. And yet in the dream, in the half-light of the stone house, they looked so much alike. Sometimes I think the voices were themselves identical, and that I raised my hand chiefly in weariness. I hear my father saying <> and to select death, O yes I can believe that of my body.
Tell me, Christians, worn and weary,  Toiling on life's pathway dim, Are you shedding light for Jesus,  Are you witnessing for him? Hark! a voice from o'er the ocean,  From the distant isles and seas, Hark! and you will hear the echo  Floating on each passing breeze. Plaintively its tones are pealing,  As a soul bowed low in grief, For the gospel's light revealing,  Send, oh send the sweet relief. As a famished infant crying,  That its hunger may be fed, Many souls in darkness dying,  Plead for life's eternal bread. Will you be a valiant soldier,  With a purpose firm and true? Holding high the blood-stained banner,  God the Master needeth you. When the Master of the vineyard  Comes the laborers to repay, Shall you be among the faithful,  Or the idlers by the way? Though you may not be a captain,  Leading on a mighty band, You can be an armor-bearer,  Following at God's command. Though the conflict wildly rages,  Pressing hot to heaven's gate, Whosoever here engages,  Him a just reward awaits. You may not possess a palace,  You may wear no title grand, You can aid in saving lost ones,  Lend a hand, a helping hand.
An indoor elephant Seems irrelevant. Keeping a seagull Is not legal. Armadillos Nest in pillows. Hungry llamas Eat pyjamas. Hippo and rhino Damage the lino. Crocodiles stay In the bath all day. Women are flustered If a large bustard, Eagle or lion Watches them iron. Such birds as grouse Flap through the house And polar bears Block up the stairs. Sheep are loafers On chairs and sofas And few sane men Can love a hen. Most people therefore Prefer to care for A dog or cat; And that is that.
<>  Soft as the memory of a vaster rest,  Secret as sorrow held within the breast  Of one whose silence never stoops to words. Harp of waste waters by thy hands caressed,  Chalice of music prayer and song and strife   Filled with that wine that drowns the ills of life  When the last vineyards of the soul are pressed. Prophet of final calm where life shall cease,  Cease and a kind forgetfulness of soul  Fall like a balm upon the wounds of peace  Thy voice shall soothe the last and sternest fight,  Threading the dark dim solitudes of night,  Like life without a prelude or a goal.
My earnestness, which might at first offend, Forgive me, for the duty it implies: I am the convoy to the cloudy end Of a most bright and regal enterprise; Which under angry constellations, ill- Mounted and under-rationed and unspurred, Set forth to find if any country still Might do obeisance to an honest word. Duped and delivered up to rascals; bound And bleeding, and his mouth stuffed; on his knees; Robbed and imprisoned; and adjudged unsound; I have beheld my master, if you please. Forgive my earnestness, who at his side Received his swift instructions, till he died.
All evening, the man sits in the chair, pretending he's reading, head down, hunched against the child's cries, the woman's body that is not the same since the child passed through. Surely he is thinking of the gods, the purity and clarity of their lives, something like the saints' but without the suffering. He is considering the precision of wrath and vengeance, justice and retribution, of terror's clean edge whetted with logic. Up there on the mountain it must be simple to see a mortal man's life break down to this: an upstairs flat of secondhand furniture where the child is shrieking and the woman is exhausted from nursing all day. Of course, he could go out. But the men at the bar are just like him, aren't they? Stunned and unhappy, unsure what happened. It's impossible to imagine how the gods live, anyway. <> <> <> <> <> <>
This is the weird of a world-old folk,  That not till the last link breaks, Not till the night is blackest,  The blood of Hengist wakes. When the sun is black in heaven,  The moon as blood above, And the earth is full of hatred,  This people tells its love. In change, eclipse, and peril,  Under the whole world's scorn, By blood and death and darkness  The Saxon peace is sworn; That all our fruit be gathered  And all our race take hands, And the sea be a Saxon river  That runs through Saxon lands. Lo! not in vain we bore him;  Behold it! not in vain, Four centuries' doom of torture  Choked in the throat of Spain, Ere priest or tyrant triumph   We know how well we know  Bone of that bone can whiten,  Blood of that blood can flow. Deep grows the hate of kindred,  Its roots take hold on hell; No peace or praise can heal it,  But a stranger heals it well. Seas shall be red as sunsets,  And kings' bones float as foam, And heaven be dark with vultures,  The night our son comes home.
We lie at night, Blinds flush against Streetlights burning Five floors below. We lie because I sleep, you don't: Statements of love, We two are one, Etc., these Faded quickly When I was dragged By dark hands down And out to where A Bu&ntilde;uel film Of my childhood Is the feature. I'm swimming through Myself as through A kind of dark Marvellous honey. Streetlights still burn Your retin&aelig;. And you begin To turn on me Purely because I sleep, you don't. And toss, and burn, And twist, and yearn To be erased, Your mind wiped clean Of everything It's ever known. But not a chance. Obstinately And humming loud As hell it goes And goes and goes. (He sleeps, I don't. He sleeps, I don't.) Then it doesn't An hour or so. And this is how We lie at night, Streetlights burning.
As not in life my father appeared to me Naked in death and said, &ldquo;This is my body.&rdquo; So I undressed and faced him, and we were Images of one another for he Appeared to me at the same age I am. Then he said, &ldquo;Now I am in Death's country.&rdquo; And I saw behind him in the dogmatic Mirror of our death a forest of graves In morning light. The smoky air was full Of men and women sweeping the stone sills. &ldquo;Since you dug me down in America,&rdquo; He said, &ldquo;I've been scratching a way with a nail, And now I have come to Poland of death.&rdquo; And I saw the keepers of the graves moving Among the shadows and the lights like lights. Then he said to me and not for the first time  &ldquo;Give me a word.&rdquo; And again, &ldquo;Who are you?&rdquo; And then, after a long silence, &ldquo;Write me The Black Book of the world.&rdquo; And I replied, &ldquo;Louis, here is my body.&rdquo; And then one Of us grew erect, and the cries began  Like the weak voices of disembodied children Driving crows from the cornfields.  He showed me The severed head of a mother in her tears Kissing and eating the severed head of a child; And one familiar spirit like a snarled hank Of somebody's black hair. And he showed also A bloody angle of the wires where groans Of men and women drowned the roar of motors And mounted to a prophecy. Then he gave me A sharp look and said, &ldquo;Thank God, I have no children,&rdquo; And ran off with a cry down an alley of That place like one who remembered suddenly The day of his own death  A short, pugnacious man, but honest and reliable. Night fell and the mirror was empty for a while. Then appeared, or half-appeared, Beatrice, my mother, In the bed of her great age. When she sleeps her human eye closes, and rests: But her blind eye the dead one stares out As if to say, &ldquo;This is the forest primeval. This is Death at last.&rdquo; And I saw again the keepers of the graves Moving among the shadows and the lights.
An old man in tears before The Muse: In my whole life, he complains, I have only written a few slim books of poetry, and gotten little attention for them. I even see it in your pitiless eyes: Why didn't I do more? Perhaps they  But how to explain? If I didn't try hard enough, I don't even know why, but always, other things seemed to be more important. Tell me, have I wasted my life, as well as my talents? Thus replies the statue: Wipe your tears, old man. You have taken a step on the difficult ladder of poetry, and even getting to the first rung is an accomplishment the gods all praise. Feel good about that, with my blessings, for on this path, there is no failure.
This is the earth? Then I don't belong here. Who are you in the lighted window, shadowed now by the flickering leaves of the wayfarer tree? Can you survive where I won't last beyond the first summer? All night the slender branches of the tree shift and rustle at the bright window. Explain my life to me, you who make no sign, though I call out to you in the night: I am not like you, I have only my body for a voice; I can't disappear into silence  And in the cold morning over the dark surface of the earth echoes of my voice drift, whiteness steadily absorbed into darkness as though you were making a sign after all to convince me you too couldn't survive here or to show me you are not the light I called to but the blackness behind it.
Am I asleep? Your words would never show it, Barbara, barbara. All the Barbaras I know hasten to the stream, wash &amp; are silent, discovering as the water hits their skin how very much they love whatever they love; water tells them. If you wear your mermaid suit you'll understand. Bababa. A&agrave;&agrave; E&eacute;&eacute;&eacute; I i i u. I'll brack sat slew over your lap. Do you hear. Frogs leap, little spotted frog you're the most beautiful of all (green light, pineal emerald), help me to pray! Dark dissolver, straighten me out! I'm talking to you, whose eyes are more furtive in laughter than the rock doves hidden in Solomon's stairs. Pray me to the other side. Roll over please. I pray &amp; watch you, Barbara, fish my incoherent meaning from your stream. O &ocirc; &ocirc; &ocirc;.
I dreampt of you, sweetheart, last night,  'Twas not a dream of bliss; I saw another in your arms  Receive a loving kiss. I saw you raise another's head  Aloft to meet your own, And gaze with rapture on a face  Which in its pleasure shone. I saw your long, dark lashes sweep  Your crimson mantled cheek; Your bosom heave with passion deep,  Your lips about to speak. And O, what torture, love, was mine,  My heart with anguish burned; And from the scene my tearful eyes  A painful witness turned. Had heaven no pity? It did seem  I prayed for some relief; I woke and wondered that a dream  Could wring my heart with grief. 'Tis morn, and I am glad again,  For in your eyes a gleam Of love and joy dispels the pain  I witnessed in that dream.
It is our pride to be Independent as the cat, Shunning attachments that Should limit our ubiquity. The imprisonment of Property we abhor But even more The yet more galling chains of love. We are (it is our vaunt) Of no more fixed abode or home Than Paris, London, Rome Affords for tent's-pitch, three-nights'-haunt. We strike no roots: Assume no preconceived set role: Seek no shell for the soul: Are this or that as suits ... We admire the cat not only For its independence but for its privacy: Contrive to be World-intimate and sedulously lonely: ... Call nothing sacrosanct: Spare none, not even ourselves: dissect All, ourselves most of all: nor expect, Save after our death, to be thanked.
If a man stands by a pin oak emptying A thermos onto the ground and it is cold In the light, and the light itself Has condensed Inside his bones, would you walk up to him And say, &ldquo;I went to the clay house. It still Smells of the hickory, even now in November. I want to know what is going To happen to everyone.&rdquo; The sound of churchbells comes out of The cane-brake. The insides of three birds are smoking On the ground by his feet. He watches A leaf come all the way down out Of its tree. Then he speaks, &ldquo;Look, little pigeon, What are you doing Out here in your nightgown? Your hair Is wet. You're standing in your bare feet Like the girls down in the cabins. You should have visited me earlier: I waited For you here each evening in the summer. I covered The bird entrails with leaves. There was a smell of plums. The fox Was in the clearing. Does your mother Forgive me. I didn't mean to ... you tell Me &lsquo;that's lost&rsquo; and &lsquo;that's dead&rsquo; And &lsquo;I don't remember ever owning a red dress.&rsquo; You know that night before I went into The fields, as much as she had hurt me in the afternoon, I laid down the gun To draw water in the tub for her. She should Find that a pleasant memory. Tell her they were wrong. &lsquo;It could have been An accident.&rsquo; When I went out the door the tub Was still filling and she called to me That she'd see to it. I have a memory of her, naked Running to a tub as if to someone, and Her mouth is opening. She kneels almost Without getting near it, and, out of breath, Just stares at the faucets for a moment; then reaches Touching the collar of the coat. I am bleeding. Leaves are stuck to my chest. Then, there's A sound she hears down in the cane, and Really it's much more Than a sound, but not yet a noise. It's like a tub overflowing onto a floor.&rdquo;
Where should we meet but in this shabby park Where the railings are missing and the branches black? Industrial pastoral, our circuit Of grass under ash, long-standing water And unimportant sunsets flaring up Above the half-dismantled fair. Our place Of in-betweens, abandoned viaducts And modern flowers, dock and willowherb, Lost mongrels, birdsong scratching at the soot Of the last century. Where should we be But here, my industrial girl? Where else But this city beyond conservation? I win you a ring at the rifle range For the twentieth time, but you've chosen A yellow, implausible fish in a bag That you hold to one side when I kiss you. Sitting in the waiting-room in darkness Beside the empty cast-iron fireplace, In the last of the heat the brick gives off, Not quite convinced there will be no more trains, At the end of a summer that never began Till we lost it, we cannot believe We are going. We speak, and we've gone. You strike a match to show the china map Of where the railways ran before us. Coal and politics, invisible decades Of rain, domestic love and failing mills That ended in a war and then a war Are fading into what we are: two young Polite incapables, our tickets bought Well in advance, who will not starve, or die Of anything but choice. Who could not choose To live this funeral, lost August left To no one by the dead, the ghosts of us.
<> Out on the waste, bleak and wild; Why dost thou wander so far from thy home? Wolves will o'ertake thee, dear child.  Jesus stands pleading,  With wounds afresh bleeding; O, come to his arms, meek and mild! Out on the mountain so bare and so cold, Hunger will blast thy fair cheek: Jesus, the shepherd, has left the dear fold, Now for   Eventide falleth,  His tender voice calleth  Hear the sweet tones low and meek! Wander no longer across the wild moor; Back to the fold quickly flee! Jesus has kindly left open the door  Open, O, wanderer for thee!  The light is still burning,  He waits thy returning  O, prodigal, wander no more!
<> The trees turn upside down, Till whining roots clutch at the moon With random talons of brown. Roots in the air will knock and saw Till the moon freeze white, but in the earth Swaying boughs begin to weave Green hymns of birth. The sexton burned the summer shade, The shade was leaves, the leaves were dead, Then placed his rake near by the spade That hung on a peg on the door of his shed. The rake stood still as the scythe behind The broken bell on the silent floor, But day and night the autumn wind Rattled the spade against the door.
The word is edged with fire. The word is mine, and the lord that it is, is mine, and the energy straight from god, this constant prayer i give, is mine, and the eye thought you would see the many levels of being life itself is split into atoms and each particle is a magnificent universe full of good and evil i awake in the mad foolishness of crazy fucking a merica white people are loose in the streets we think about the ways to restore our gesture and understanding, keeping the world natural changing the nature of moving in the actual spirit, its the time ing the ri- thum in the constant gorgeous reenactment of God re- creating himself
Walking in deserted streets Heedless of the sky sobbing Rain upon her slender shoulders, She wears my admiration Like a truant ray of sun, And swings indifferently Into a pub. Shop-assistant, stenotypist, Chauffeur's daughter, mistress Of the old- Clothes man, feeder Of the milkman's nightly fancies, Formed an image Which I carried home. And on my lips a hurricane Of Helen's kisses.
Would I could sing of joy I only  Remember as without alloy: Of life full-filled, that once was lonely:  Of love a treasure, not a toy: Of grief, regret but makes the keener,  Of aspiration, failure mars  These would I sing, and sit serener  Than song among the stars. Would I could sing of faith unbroken;  Of heart-kept vows, and not of tears: Of promised faith and vows love-spoken,  That have been kept through many years: Of truth, the false but leaves the truer;  Of trust, the doubt makes doubly sure  These would I sing, the noble doer  Whose dauntless heart is pure. I would not sing of time made hateful;  Of hope that only clings to hate: Of charity, that grows ungrateful;  And pride that will not stand and wait.  Of humbleness, care hath imparted;  Of resignation, born of ills, These would I sing, and stand high-hearted  As hope upon the hills. Once on a throne of gold and scarlet  I touched a harp and felt it break; I dreamed I was a king a varlet,  A slave, who only slept to wake!  Still on that harp my memory lingers,  While on a tomb I lean and read, &ldquo;Dust are our songs, and dust we singers,  And dust are all who heed.&rdquo;
&lsquo;Farewell, Romance!&rsquo; the Cave-men said;  &lsquo;With bone well carved He went away. &lsquo;Flint arms the ignoble arrowhead,  &lsquo;And jasper tips the spear to-day. &lsquo;Changed are the Gods of Hunt and Dance, &lsquo;And He with these. Farewell, Romance!&rsquo; &lsquo;Farewell, Romance!&rsquo; the Lake-folk sighed;  &lsquo;We lift the weight of flatling years; &lsquo;The caverns of the mountain-side  &lsquo;Hold Him who scorns our hutted piers. &lsquo;Lost hills whereby we dare not dwell, &lsquo;Guard ye His rest. Romance, Farewell!&rsquo; &lsquo;Farewell, Romance!&rsquo; the Soldier spoke;  &lsquo;By sleight of sword we may not win, &lsquo;But scuffle 'mid uncleanly smoke  &lsquo;Of arquebus and culverin. &lsquo;Honour is lost, and none may tell &lsquo;Who paid good blows. Romance, farewell!&rsquo; &lsquo;Farewell, Romance!&rsquo; the Traders cried;  &lsquo;Our keels have lain with every sea. &lsquo;The dull-returning wind and tide  &lsquo;Heave up the wharf where we would be; &lsquo;The known and noted breezes swell &lsquo;Our trudging sails. Romance, farewell!&rsquo; &lsquo;Good-bye, Romance!&rsquo; the Skipper said;  &lsquo;He vanished with the coal we burn. &lsquo;Our dial marks full-steam ahead,  &lsquo;Our speed is timed to half a turn. &lsquo;Sure as the ferried barge we ply &lsquo;'Twixt port and port. Romance, good-bye!&rsquo; &lsquo;Romance!&rsquo; the season-tickets mourn,  &lsquo; &lsquo;But passed with coach and guard and horn   &lsquo;And left the local late again! &lsquo;Confound Romance!&rsquo;... And all unseen Romance brought up the nine-fifteen. His hand was on the lever laid,  His oil-can soothed the worrying cranks, His whistle waked the snowbound grade,  His fog-horn cut the reeking Banks; By dock and deep and mind and mill The Boy-god reckless laboured still! Robed, crowned and throned, He wove His spell,  Where heart-blood beat or hearth-smoke curled, With unconsidered miracle,  Hedged in a backward-gazing world: Then taught His chosen bard to say:  &lsquo;Our King was with us yesterday!&rsquo;
Beloved, gaze in thine own heart, The holy tree is growing there; From joy the holy branches start, And all the trembling flowers they bear. The changing colours of its fruit Have dowered the stars with merry light; The surety of its hidden root Has planted quiet in the night; The shaking of its leafy head Has given the waves their melody, And made my lips and music wed, Murmuring a wizard song for thee. There the Loves a circle go, The flaming circle of our days, Gyring, spiring to and fro In those great ignorant leafy ways; Remembering all that shaken hair And how the wing&egrave;d sandals dart, Thine eyes grow full of tender care: Beloved, gaze in thine own heart. Gaze no more in the bitter glass The demons, with their subtle guile, Lift up before us when they pass, Or only gaze a little while; For there a fatal image grows That the stormy night receives, Roots half hidden under snows, Broken boughs and blackened leaves. For all things turn to barrenness In the dim glass the demons hold, The glass of outer weariness, Made when God slept in times of old. There, through the broken branches, go The ravens of unresting thought; Flying, crying, to and fro, Cruel claw and hungry throat, Or else they stand and sniff the wind, And shake their ragged wings; alas! Thy tender eyes grow all unkind: Gaze no more in the bitter glass.
Go as in a dream knowing in every scene deep uproilings of earth beneath your feet, slumberinga sullen redness grows; wounds break open in the crusts above, pustulences upon the skin love wears; generations of despairmount up into a momentary swelling.In an instant four hundred and thirty-two thousand years inertia of conflicting forces shows its face raging. Against my body,against my soul, against my spirit, into the destruction of the grades of me, to the undoing of those hierarchies hold a vast shuddering underlies this mounting of the stairs from below, this bringing up of the old question I will not allow. Old dreams denied.the voided images go down into the preparations for catastrophe.
Wet skeletons play wet harmonicas in the electric typewriter, to drive the typist mad who would rather be out, in fine weather, not in with his Personality. But he remembers all the beds in his life, some made neatly, some unmade, some made of earth, some made of blood, some made of books, and all the bodies floating over them: bits of himself stick out of everyone like broken arrows. It appears now that the whole race is practicing karate to eliminate the weather and keep him in: Italians walk slapping each other's backs toward the Future, Romanians with balled fists punch holes through the Scarecrow, Hungarians pinch the half moons of each other's asses and Giggle, at the end of piers French men &amp; woman kiss incessantly in the Rain under tanks oily Russians hug each other attempting to Turn Over, in neon lit rooms Americans shake with one hand in their Pockets. The Chinese would rather bow. Armies go, leaving their exhibitionists behind. God gives you tongue, the devil gives you hands, the eyes are of an even stranger make. The typing finger alone, ponders the unmade.
By the turn of the driveway, two lilacs have called Attention to themselves, not by an excess Of bloom but by an attenuation Of design: altered shadow on gravel. Gone for good are those understated Cases I rescued from worthless soil: Ripped-off dusty miller from the beach, Or, struck by overdoses of rain, Spoiled spotted-leaf geranium. Worse Is the thud of birds that kill themselves By flinging their bodies with force against Glass windows and doors as if this were Some sort of morgue for feathered things. The deaf and dumb would find all language Futile here; nature is silent  But underneath the silence, struggle. While powder-puff clouds are showing off Quickening shapes against more stately Clouds behind them, an ant has dragged A fly across the threshold, a mealy Bug fastened its sticky jaws Into the crotch of two green stems, Chewing the asparagus fern to scruff. Last night the moon had a Byzantine flare Of lemon gold like the goldleaf halos One sees in the early Italian masters  Venice, in fact, comes to mind, the palazzos' Sandcastle, ice-cream feats, effects Childish but pleasing, of spun-stone heights, While a rat stands gnawing a lettuce leaf At the edge of one of the canals. And sex Like a frog jumps onto the screen at once, Its spiritual and degraded aspects Equally keen. In fall, when the first Earth colors harden and oak fire starts Its flame and rust, memory dotes On the old clich&eacute;s of the unexpected. Desire never knows the end of the book Any more than the leaves of the lilac dug Up in the woods, brought home, and planted Can tell us whether its roots next spring Will burst into purple or white cascades.
They would be none the wiser, even could they overhear My slurred ecstatic mumbling or grow somehow aware Of eyes ablaze behind shut lids in the attic gloom. Even if they adjured me on pain of death to disclose All that I see and am when I so absent myself, What would they make of steady, somnolent light-rings Converging, violet-blue or green hypnotic gold, Upon a warded peep-hole, as it were a rift in Space, Through which I peer, as it might be into your eyes, And pass disembodied, a spiral wisp or whorl Tall, slanted, russet-red, crowned with a lunar nimbus?  To you the central flow, the glow, the ease, the hush Of music drawn through irrecoverable modes. And then such after-glory, meteors across the heart When I awake, astonished, in the bed where once you dreamed. &lsquo;Metaphysical&rsquo;, they would comment lamely, &lsquo;metaphysical&rsquo;; But you would smile at me for leaving so much out.
That civilisation may not sink Its great battle lost, Quiet the dog, tether the pony To a distant post. Our master Caesar is in the tent Where the maps are spread, His eyes fixed upon nothing, A hand under his head. Like a long-legged fly upon the stream His mind moves upon silence. That the topless towers be burnt And men recall that face, Move most gently if move you must In this lonely place. She thinks, part woman, three parts a child, That nobody looks; her feet Practise a tinker shuffle Picked up on the street. Like a long-legged fly upon the stream Her mind moves upon silence. That girls at puberty may find The first Adam in their thought, Shut the door of the Pope's chapel, Keep those children out. There on that scaffolding reclines Michael Angelo. With no more sound than the mice make His hand moves to and fro. Like a long-legged fly upon the stream His mind moves upon silence.
And I, Ougadougou, sprawled on the Niger, watched them come: red whispering walls moving, smoke squeezing our eyes, cinders sneezing. The heat was before us; mirages danced in its silver; our brittle walls crumbled, flat walking roofs tumbled; red tongues licked grass from the streets, children screamed, women ran, crackled sparks' eyes crashing to ashes; goats butted and turned, blinded; horses stamped. Where are the dancers, the flutes' reed voices cut from the river, the songs' achievement of cymbals? They come riding, porcupine driving our errors before them; too soft, too blandished, too ready for peace and for terror.
May God be praised for woman That gives up all her mind, A man may find in no man A friendship of her kind That covers all he has brought As with her flesh and bone, Nor quarrels with a thought Because it is not her own. Though pedantry denies, It's plain the Bible means That Solomon grew wise While talking with his queens, Yet never could, although They say he counted grass, Count all the praises due When Sheba was his lass, When she the iron wrought, or When from the smithy fire It shuddered in the water: Harshness of their desire That made them stretch and yawn, Pleasure that comes with sleep, Shudder that made them one. What else He give or keep God grant me no, not here, For I am not so bold To hope a thing so dear Now I am growing old, But when, if the tale's true, The Pestle of the moon That pounds up all anew Brings me to birth again  To find what once I had And know what once I have known, Until I am driven mad, Sleep driven from my bed, By tenderness and care, Pity, an aching head, Gnashing of teeth, despair; And all because of some one Perverse creature of chance, And live like Solomon That Sheba led a dance.
Once more by the brook the alder leaves turn mauve, bronze, violet, beautiful after the green of crude summer; galled black stems, pithy, tangled, twist in the flesh-colored vines of wild cyclamen. Mist drifts below the mountaintop in prismatic tatters. The brook is full, spilling down heavily, loudly, in silver spate from the beaver ponds in the high marshy meadows. The year is sinking: heavily, loudly, beautifully. Deer move heavily in the brush like bears, half drunk on masty acorns and rotten wild apples. The pileated woodpecker thumps a dead elm slowly, irregularly, meditatively. Like a broken telephone a cricket rings without assertion in dead asters and goldenrod; asters gone cloudy with seed, goldenrod burnt and blackened. A gray trout rests under the lip of glacial stone. One by one the alder leaves plunge down to earth, veering, and lie there, glowing, like a shirt of Nessus. My heart in my ribs does what it has done occasionally all my life: thumps and heaves suddenly in irregular rhythm that makes me gasp. How many times has this season turned and gone down? How many! I move heavily into the bracken, and the deer stand still a moment, uncertain, before they break away, snorting and bounding heavily before me.
Radio says Avon survey reveals American women feel good about themselves. Forty per cent say they've never looked better in their lives, eighty per cent say they look younger than their age, ninety per cent say they're not afraid their man will leave them for a younger woman, but one hundred per cent admit they think they'll die some day, and that's why there'll always be an Avon.
To be born famous, as your father's son,  Is a fate troublesome enough, unless Like Philip's Alexander of Macedon  You can out-do him by superb excess Of greed and profligacy and wantonness. To become famous as a wonder-child  Brings no less trouble, with whatever art You toyed precociously, for Fame had smiled  Malevolence at your birth ... Only Mozart Played on, still smiling from his placid heart. To become famous while a raw young man  And lead Fame by the nose, to a bitter end, As Caesar's nephew did, Octavian  Styling himself Augustus, is to pretend Peace in the torments that such laurels lend. To become famous in your middle years  For merit not unblessed by accident  Encountering cat-calls, missiles, jeers and sneers  From half your uncontrollable parliament  Is no bad fate, to a good sportsman sent.... But Fame attendant on extreme old age  Falls best. What envious youth cares to compete With a lean sage hauled painfully upstage,  Bowing, gasping, shuffling his frozen feet  A ribboned hearse parked plainly down the street?
A poor girl sat by a tower of the sea All a-wringing of her hands; &lsquo;Will he never show,&rsquo; says she, &lsquo;Just as a token, just a glimmer of his ship's lant ... horn?&rsquo; &lsquo;Oh, all ye little grains of sand Twist into a rope shall draw his keel Hither. Oh, ye little gulls and terns, Join wings and bear me from this strand To where I'll feel His arms, and find where on the foam his ship is borne.&rsquo; <> &lsquo;Oh, all ye little stars o' the night Come down and cluster in my hair; Oh, bright night-flashes o' the waves Shine round me till I'm all one flame of light. So, far at sea, He'll deem a beacon beckons him to me....&rsquo; A poor girl sat nigh a tower of the sea All a-wringing of her hands: &lsquo;Will he never show,&rsquo; said she, &lsquo;Just a token, just a glimmer of his ship's lant ... horn?&rsquo;
You find one drinking at the creek, scratching and drinking before take-off. He lifts back and takes aim, firing homeward. That's the moment to get your sighting, get the direction and slant of climb and you'll be looking right at the tree on the ridge above where the honey hangs inside like cells of a battery charged with sweetness. The whole tree has the hum of a transformer. Bees bubble, circling like electrons. Though excited as before a holdup and hot from the long climb, you drop the ax and wait for dark.
That's good, the charcoal triangle of eye as illegible, impenetrable, as the dark furred cleft so laconically displayed between belly swell and the soft sag of thigh; good, the airbrushed, antiqued cerulean of kimono and cloudlets (what's a kimono doing on a rowboat, anyway?) to tip us off to the Baudelairean managerial style of this photographer who revels, clearly, in correspondences. O turtled, inky murk: swallow the skiff, swallow the rug and cushion, engulf her who lolls so improbably looking for trouble among the cattails in glossy, pungent mud. Sweet lard, folded, smeared and spread for finger-sinking: as the fable develops her, she will slide into reflective ooze, sleazy Ophelia, too milky, too azure here with virgin eye, and cleft that never cried.
the motion not verbal the newt less active than I: the fire pink not me (the words not me not my nature I Not even honor anything but that my freshness not be opened (as my mail must not be, before I do. No doctrine even that the flower flames if I don't. No capture if the captive, even the instant, is not I. Thus thou.
Most neglect this road, the concrete torn and hunched, purple boxcars roasting in the wind or in the sun, both direct as brass. Only smoke from two shacks and a scratchy radio prevent abandonment from falling on this lateral bare area like fog. In the winter what clean nightmare brought a sketcher here to risk his hands, the loss of line in this much light? Not the poverty alone, but other ways of being, using basic heat: wood brought in by the same sea that is blaring wealthy ships to a freshly painted port. He was right to come. Light in this place cannot kill the lines of the charred boat, the rusted net, the log-boom beached and slanted waiting for a tide. Not when a need to die here, just to be an unobtrusive ghost, takes from mud and wood the color of the day.
Convalescent to get along the shop fronts far as a butcher's awning. In the wind and sun, pause. Quiet afternoon to be powerless held up by clothes muffled from the empty bright world unrecognized near home. Library books mostly about mountains Kangchenjunga in the silver crust hanging on the gulf beyond Darjeeling; Godwin Austen in the silver crust. Deep sky between the fragile clouds backing the library weathervane set on a cupola of green. Civic water with lilies and flies. Men extend a trellis. It opens across a flowerbed to enclose  Boats recede shouts tade among the olive green expanses The sense of it all slides faint-tasting outwards from pain low in the body in the registers of the body, among the all-but-kicked-against fencing of split birch-logs, the pergolas  Even these sometimes leave it, the discomfort to be without present image: body trying to walk itself off to a memory of health; or at times hope when the water's seen to move; a fleck of light on the ripple.
I have seen your feet gilded by morning Naked under your long gown. I have seen them Keep such state upon the unswept floor I could have sworn Venetian artisans Had all night been awake, painting in gold, To set your beauty on appropriate heels. What wonder then that I insist on gilt As covering for your feet, which might inlay (If there were still such metamorphoses) The morning and form a constellation To take all eyes from Venus, though she stood As from antiquity in naked light Till then unvying queen. Your beauty is not used. Though you have lain A thousand nights upon my bed, you rise Always so splendidly renewed that I have thought, Seeing the sweet continence of your breast, Mole-spotted, your small waist, and long slim thigh, That even the unicorn that savage beast If he should startle on you fresh from light Would be so marvelled by virginity That he would come, trotting and mild, To lay his head upon your fragrant lap And be surprised.
The long light on green lawns is given back, The pattern of the trees set forth on evening air, But formal through the foam, designed in black. It is the clarity of spring we see this year. Would a more clement season perhaps have shown The way to cleave rock and less cool and strange Brought up the wild source shouting from the stone? This held the growing inward and the secret change. For in this spring you have been that which shone, Have become simply the pure clarity of light That shows the trees black on the vivid lawn And paints the static scene, indelible and bright. One may behold and yet not suffer change And the source still be locked from its return: This love is in the eyes, not yet in the heart's range, So it is trees and the green lawn that seem to burn.
On the road to Canaan there is a big dairy farmbeside the barn there are rows of little houses like white boxescalves are chained to themthey are fed only milk and not allowed to wander or they wouldn't be tender vealmy soft-hearted granddaughter asks me to stop the carshe wants to go down to pet them and comfort them I say the farmer might not like that it would be trespassing I tell her that there are also people who are chained to boxes but she doesn't understand me the whole of life lies before her.
I &lsquo;mind as how the night before that show Us five got talkin&rsquo;; we was in the know. &lsquo;Ah well,&rsquo; says Jimmy, and he's seen some scrappin', &lsquo;There ain&rsquo;t no more than five things as can happen,  You get knocked out; else wounded, bad or cushy; Scuppered; or nowt except you're feelin' mushy.' One of us got the knock-out, blown to chops; One lad was hurt, like, losin' both his props; And one to use the word of hypocrites  Had the misfortune to be took by Fritz. Now me, I wasn't scratched, praise God Almighty, Though next time please I'll thank Him for a blighty. But poor old Jim, he's livin' and he's not; He reckoned he'd five chances, and he had: He's wounded, killed, and pris'ner, all the lot, The flamin' lot all rolled in one. Jim's mad.
I sigh for the heavenly country, Where the heavenly people pass, And the sea is as quiet as a mirror Of beautiful beautiful glass. I walk in the heavenly field, With lilies and poppies bright, I am dressed in a heavenly coat Of polished white. When I walk in the heavenly parkland My feet on the pasture are bare, Tall waves the grass, but no harmful Creature is there. At night I fly over the housetops, And stand on the bright moony beams; Gold are all heaven's rivers, And silver her streams.
A word sits on the kitchen counter next to the pitcher of cream with its blue cornflowers bent. Perhaps a guest left it in a hurry or as a tip for good service, or as a fist against some imagined insult. Or it fell with some old plaster from the ceiling, a word some antediluvian helpmate hushed up. It picked itself up from the floor, brushed itself off and, somehow, scratched its way up the cupboards. It appears to be a word of considerable strength and even significance, but I can't bring myself to look into its gaze. The cornflowers are pointing toward the cookies not far away. An expert could be called to defuse the word, but it is Sunday and they are still sleeping or singing, and, besides that, the word seems to have moved again on its own, and now it appears warm and welcoming, it throbs with life and a sincere desire to understand me. It looks slightly puzzled and hurt, as though I.... I take a step toward it, I hold out my hand. &ldquo;Friend,&rdquo; I say, but it is shrinking, it is going away to its old home in the familiar cold dark of the human parking lot.
Sentimentalist who'd die Rather than admit you're one, Flying from yourself you run Fast so fast that one day I Think you'll turn a corner, start, Stand and come full circle meet Your accusing exiled heart Triumphing in your defeat. And the tears that would not rise Into your resistant eyes, All the too-long-waiting tears, All the prides and all the fears, All at last will fall, and all Loose you, free you as they fall!
Mark's sheep, I said, but they were only stones, boulders in the uncropped grass, granite shoulders weathered to the bone and old as that first morning where God was. And yet they looked like sheep so like you half expected them to startle, bolt in a leap because some tyke had barked, because a bluejay darted  dart of shadow under blue of jay  or someone shouted by the water trough, slammed a car-door, drove away, or squirrels quarreled, or a gun went off, or just because they must: that terrified impulse to be somewhere else browsers and ruminators seem to share as though they knew, they only, the sky falls and  But Mark's sheep never startled from the grass. They knew their place, their boulders' business: to let the nights go over, the days pass, let years go, summer, autumn, winter, each by itself, each motionless, alone, praising the world by being in it, praising the earth by being stone.
work two ways, baby. We together and I hear you breathin, the air raspin over tongue and teeth and lips we come together or apart and it don't matter. You mine. I made you in the private night: Makin work mo ways than one and I have put it on yo mind. I'm cool round yo friends laugh at yo jive, by-side you with a smile. But it is on yo mind you still feel little pointy breasts and crisp spiky hair? Is it what you seen in them other mens' eyes that make you have to flo show me with yo hands claim me, say this is mine? &ldquo;mine&rdquo; work mo ways than one, baby.
&ldquo;Petals of the marguerite,  Tell me, pray, Doth he love me? Answer  &lsquo;Yea&rsquo; or &lsquo;nay.&rsquo;&rdquo; &ldquo;Loveth?&rdquo; laughs she gaily,  &ldquo;Let him sigh! For all the love he offers,  What care I?&rdquo; &ldquo;Petals of the marguerite,  Tell me, pray, Doth he love me? Answer  &lsquo;Yea&rsquo; or &lsquo;nay.&rsquo;&rdquo; &ldquo;Loves not?&rdquo; weeps she sorely,  &ldquo;Let me die! For life without his love,  What care I?&rdquo;
I don't remember where I was going or how I got here except for a few moments in the womb of a train at night outside the window a moon and inside a sound so steady it seemed like silence it's too late I know but I keep thinking it will get earlier I will start getting younger slowly and this time doing it backwards I will do it right and finally I will grow smaller and become a good wise child at last
Sea-wind at the door and the song of sand on glass. Was it Vivaldi they played on the wind-up gramophone, or Beethoven's  fortissimo in the rattling room? Sunday nights, my studies done, tea on a tray and the small coal smoking, in my hands the gift: nine inches high, three-thousand-year-old glass the blue of lapis lazuli, and the smile they taught me to see as I turned him under the lamp. Three old sisters, their travelling days stowed for the dark like bottled fruit, fragments of Asia, Africa, archaeology of Egypt, old Etruria. Daily they walked the dunes to the beach to stare at the sea and turn for home where sand drifted the sills and rooms of the wind-filled wooden bungalow, and marram grass crept closer every day. Tonight, under the slow light, he composes old Egyptian blues against a white wall, a glitter of sand in his eye.
Bells overbrim with sound And spread from cupolas Out through the shaking air Endless unbreaking circles Cool and clear as water. A stone dropped in the water Opens the lips of the pool And starts the unovertaking Rings, till the pool is full Of waves as the air of bells. The deep-sea bell of sleep Under the pool of the mind Flowers in concentric circles Of annihilation till Both sight and sound die out, Both pool and bells are quelled.
The mash of rotted-down oak leaves of bark from drifting branches the white flesh blackening of the salmon who jumped the net and perished of old age under her shadow-rock the ragged robin chewed into shreds the rich rust of a radiator the bones of voles polished down to white specks the dragged down muslin robbed of its dye then mashed to filaments and sweet Ophelia too  all in the soft cool deeps of mud under the mirror all in the soft cool deeps of mud all one in the soft cool deeps of mud gradually dancing down to the ocean
What soul hath struck its need of melody, From life's strange instrument whereon it plays? Are the aspiring strains of weary days E'er gathered in their full intensity, Swelling a psalm incomparable, free To utter all their yearning? Nay! the lays Moan on inadequately, for the ways Of God in shaping souls we may not see. 'Mid baffled hopes we cry out in our need, And wrestle in the shadows, wond'ring when Such dissonance can e'er be sweet, and how. But soon the watching Father will have freed Our earthly ears to catch the music: then The chrism of perfect peace shall bathe each brow.
muggy and the foghorn clear air darkening wherever from cars with red lights plane tailscorners there was nothing buildings stand for years thought back on stars flash the wind down the rain thunder cryarrives one minute dogs bark
I do not know how to strip you, short of skinning you alive. You wear your bareness neatly pressed, as if the deftest touch will crumple it. But scar me for life with the gauntlets of your strength. Lapping your waist, an intended belt-print impedes my headway. Even your groin is haunted by the faint outline of a pair of shorts. I maul their fabric, in the vain hope that it will give. And when I call for help, scorched on the hot- plate moon, you dress my wounds in unlikely dreams, of hidebound men. Breathless, mummified.
Dear Hubert, Bored, malevolent and mute on A wet park seat, I look at life and Luton And think of spittle, slaughterhouses, double Pneumonia, schizophrenia, kidney trouble, Piles, paranoia, gallstones in the bladder, Manic depressive madness growing madder, Cretins with hideous tropical diseases And red-eyed necrophiles while on the breezes From Luton Gasworks comes a stench that closes Like a damp frigid hand on my neuroses; And Time (arthritic deaf-mute) stumbles on And on and on and on. Yours glumly, John
They have refined the means of destruction, abstract science almost visibly shining, it is so highly polished. Immaterial weapons no one could ever hold in their hands streak across darkness, across great distances, threading through mazes to arrive at targets that are concepts  But one ancient certainty remains: war means blood spilling from living bodies, means severed limbs, blindness, terror, means grief, agony, orphans, starvation, prolonged misery, prolonged resentment and hatred and guilt, means all of these multiplied, multiplied, means death, death, death and death.
Two men face to face. Equally as they stand Light flashes from the blade Each carries in his hand. He nearest to me now Grips murder in the right. His adversary comes Left-handed to the fight. And as they both advance Twin-fated through the days I seek a chink of hope In their envisored gaze. But enmity has so Riveted soul to soul That if I snapped that thread Or turned them from their goal, They'd plunge their daggers down Not in each other's heart But in my pleading breast Where faith and pity start. Therefore, as much in fear Of life as I of death, They wind the hawsers in, The cables of their breath, Till scarce an inch divides The winch-wheels of their rage. Desperate for the end I beg them to engage. And as they strike and strike The mirror tinkles down. They and their world crash out. Free now, I stand alone.
The Doctor draws the world to him by dint of much imagination, fortunes spilled to bring the  <> bearing crates of wine will leave the coastline of Virginia, clinking. The latest books he brings that this place too might shine as a center of learning and enterprise. I have watched his projects grow, consume him  hotelier, surgeon, gentleman farmer  days when the light drains out of him, and irritable, distant, he walks into the orchard but finds, it seems, no peace among the trees, his dream of ordered rows.
I wake, gargling my holy bells from village to village to town. I bathe in the small slice of river that has become my own. I cross a field of corn; a dead tractor; the farmer's silent scythe holding a still mouth of hay. I pass the milk-barn where each holy  cow mutters a rosary, along the country road where hedges sit opposite like believers. Down by the cottage a woman wakes in a fit and washes her hands. The weekday broom fasts, starved of dust. There is nothing stopping me. I walk in big strides, as I must, across this land curtain after curtain opens, the relief of confession. My church is grey. My people are clean. I shake their hand for  morning mass. The light in the sky is divine. I dedicate myself to the sun. Every tavern has a bolt. Every village shop has a shut door. Every bolted horse has a shut stable. Bad luck strikes with one chord. Come lunchtime, I feed them. No day will boast a better roast: golden potatoes, honest gravy, roasted parsnips; I'm a good host. Before the food they will always thank me, or be cursed. Nothing worse than my scowl, my scorn, my thin lips pursed. If you can't be good on my day you will wish you never were born. Standing solemn in the Square are the good children, born on my day with meek, bonny smiles on their faces, dressed in their Sunday best: crease in the trouser, check in the dress. Satisfied here, I head for the town. Up the steepest of hills, the smell of praying like the smell of chicken is comforting. I inhale deeply, this cool noon. The mist on the hills, a christening shawl; the wind keeps up with my pace the way a faithful dog will. Nothing to match one of my walks. I pass people, hand in hand, arm in arm, alone, past the church and steeple and nod and tip my hat, say Good Day, Good Day and have  Good Day said back. Not in a month of myself did I ever imagine change. Years pass. I punish those who sin. I have free range. The wife of the hunter who fornicated on my day has a baby with the head of a dog on the 7th of May. Sometimes I choose the best punishment of all forgiveness. Sure as fate they will pray themselves out of the mess. Finally, in the late afternoon, I head for town. My eyes sore. Cars cough up phlegm. The steeple beckons with a crooked finger. I pass a man, sick in the street, who is my dead-ringer. My own reflection rears up in a mirror. I am growing thin. Shop doors are shamefully wide. I am all in. Lads by a dull corner swig brown beer. Jigging music swirls from alehouses. I feel faint, sick. I go into one. &lsquo;I am the seventh day,&rsquo; I shout. Some big fellow bangs a gong and chucks me out. I run backwards, my tan leather shoes skidding on the cobbles. The sky stained with the red of cocktails. The stench of the city in my hair; my clothes stale. Smoke and stinking sewers. My own breath tastes of ale. Quick down the terrace where no child goes to Sunday school, where arguments ring instead of bells and some man's cruel shadow punches his fist against a wall, blasphemous. There's the man who shouts obscenities. Infamous. I can't stop myself; I mutter his curses under my breath trying out the new fierce words. Quickstep. All the colour drains from the sky like blood from a face. The street suddenly darkens. In one house, I see a woman's face bruise. A man closes the curtain. No one sits with the book, no one clasps their hands in prayer. No one gives a kind look. I am ill; I feel my own blood thin and weaken. I am lost. Dim eyes. This dark street is the same as the last. My legs are losing their power. I have lost my past: the deep secretive lanes of my childhood, the barn, the bales of hay, the good moods. I try to speak to myself: all I get back is gibberish. A bad dog skulks past without a leash or a wish for an owner. I follow it till I come to a corner, turn left and up the hill. The smell of dung makes me feel bereft. I am losing my senses. Everything has changed. I am not at home; every house has been rearranged. A big dish give me the cruel eye from Ballantyre Farm. The old Square is crammed with lies. Pious hypocrites; selfish people who would not share a meal. My feet are heavy wooden crosses. My full lips are sealed. Nobody recognises me. I am invisible in my old hometown. Not a single greeting. No choir boy in a proud gown. It is half past eleven. My collection box cannot sing. No musical threepenny bit. My stricken bells cannot ring. My back is bent. Somebody, somewhere has put me to the test. Sing a hymn. I am done. I am no better than all the rest. Darkness. Rock me to sleep. I have lost my elegance. One last lullaby. One wistful, parting glance. Adeste Fideles. Agnus Dei. Angelus Domini. Anno Domini. Amina. Alter ego. Lapsus Calami. I vanish to the pinpoint of my own dark eye.
From the Nativity which I have already celebrated  the Babe in its Mother's arms the Wise Men in their stolen splendor and Joseph and the soldiery attendant with their incredulous faces make a scene copied we'll say from the Italian masters but with a difference  the mastery of the painting and the mind the resourceful mind that governed the whole the alert mind dissatisfied with what it is asked to and cannot do accepted the story and painted it in the brilliant colors of the chronicler the downcast eyes of the Virgin as a work of art for profound worship
<> My songs are slight, my dreams are only words, They flutter up on wings as frail as birds; Your dreams in steel go soaring toward the sky. Epical phrases knock against the stars  Marble sonatas, rhapsodies in stone. Such song a cosmic trumpet must have blown, A cosmic cello played its mighty bars. Yet when your music is dissolved and past, My songs for all their slightness shall endure. Words born of love so splendid and so sure As ours, have strength that nothing can impart To steel or marble; nothing can outlast The stubborn frailty of the human heart.
First and best is a window to the sea When homing fishing-boats are silhouettes As early sunlight tints the empty beach; Or when, past shadowed shingle, water glows In slow dusk and the flecking lighthouse-beam With triple gesture comforts, charms and warns. The second window opens onto plains Where wheatfields stretch from nearby ear and stem Until the stared-at skyline disappears. In winter, stripped, the earth reveals itself: Its muscular and bleak topography Teaches endurance, promises rebirth. Third and last is a window onto trees. It will do for now: I like this filtered light. The willow dusts the grass; the copper beech Has weathered its long autumn gracefully; And soon, when leafless branches web the sky, The trees will show new lines, lucidities.
In the jingling, clear air, Skim over the Temple domes Birds, those fishes with hair. Remember the signa fish were In the incoherent catacombs, Wombs that gave but mixed birth. In a tunic, striped and cool, I lie on the red earth, Over me kneels my Fool. Floats from a far shrine A Virgin, pure of male girth. The upper air seethes to brine. She is the first unlike All Them, Jerusalem! Jerusalem! She planes down over me, Endymion and the Moon I see. &ldquo;Unclean! Unclean!&rdquo; my Fool cries, Hatred of me frees his eyes. I jerk out what comes next In the ritual of slaves of slime, My fear all unstrung: &ldquo;Touch me not!&rdquo; to the unsexed, Abstract, furious Virgin hung Above me, time after time And like a great, dull fish She floats on: &ldquo;It's as you wish.&rdquo;
I'm only a wartime working girl, The machine shop makes me deaf, I have no prospects after the war And   K for Kitty calling P for Prue ...  Bomb Doors Open ...  Over to You. Night after night as he passes by I wonder what he's gone to bomb And I fancy in the jabber of the mad machines That I hear him talking on the intercomm.  K for Kitty calling P for Prue ...  Bomb Doors Open ...  Over to You. So there's no one in the world, I sometimes think, Such a wallflower as I For I must talk to myself on the ground While he is talking to his friends in the sky:  K for Kitty calling P for Prue ...  Bomb Doors Open ...  Over to You.
Serious, but smiling, stately and serene,  And lovelier than a flower, She stands; in whom all sympathies convene  As perfumes in a bower; Through whom I feel what soul and heart must mean,  And all their love and power. Eyes, that commune with the frank skies of truth,  Beneath their cloud-like curls; Lips of immortal rose, where joy and youth  Nestle like priceless pearls; Hair, that suggests the Bible braids of Ruth,  Deeper than any girl's. When first I saw her, 't was as if within  My gaze took shape some song  Played by a master of the violin   A music, pure and strong, That rapt my soul above all earthly sin  To heights that know no wrong.
Twas in thi year o 1991, a palindromic sonovabitch gif ivir Eh saw wan, that Eh feenisht this, meh latest ode, which thi fowk o Dundee wull nivir see, by Gode, unless Eh pent ut oan thi auld Perth Road. In which case, gif Eh'm no arrestit, therr's a couple o dugs it micht keep interestit, and, gif Eh am, some late nicht TESCO shoppirs may pondir wha's thon gettin beat up by thi coppirs? afore they daundir hame mebbe tae luke up meh name in Billy Kay's  tho, bein frae Ayrshire, he's nivir heard o me, nor, bar wan reference, o michty MAGONNAGAL, which maun that rare speerit sairly appal, but thigithir we'll huddle in the bandstand o thi Magdalen Green; Eh'll cuddle a boattul, he'll cuddle thi auld Queen, and thigithir praise TESCO'S, maist magnificent tae be seen, better by faur than thi auld Blackness Skail, than Haakhill  or thi Overgate, than Genril Monk's Hoose or thi Royal  Airch, or thi Pillars or thi Wellgate, gif yi ken whit Eh mean.
Each night this house sinks into the shadows under its weight of love and fear and pity. Each morning it floats up again so lightly it seems attached to sky instead of earth, a place where we will always go on living and there will be no dead to leave behind. But when we think of whom we've left behind already in the ever-hungry shadows, even in the morning hum of living we pause a minute and are filled with pity for the lovely children of the earth who run up and down the stairs so lightly and who weave their careless songs so lightly through the hedges which they play behind that the fruits and flowers of the earth rise up on their stems above the shadows. Perhaps even an apple can feel pity; perhaps the lilac wants to go on living. In this house where we have all been living we bind the family together lightly with knots made equally of love and pity and the knowledge that we'll leave behind only partial memories, scraps of shadows, trinkets of our years upon the earth. I think about my father in the earth as if it were a room in which he's living, as if it were a house composed of shadows where he remembers those he loved not lightly, where he remembers what he left behind. He had a great capacity for pity but told me that I mustn't waste my pity on him he'd had his share of life on earth, and he was happy just to leave behind daughters of daughters who would go on living. So he seemed to leave us almost lightly, closing the curtains which were stitched with shadows. Always save your pity for the living who walk the eggshell crust of earth so lightly, in front of them, behind them, only shadows.
Some of his words burned away in the sun. Some he gave to camel drivers, throwing in gratuitous metaphors. Some he held in the throat, then swallowed. Some he kept on the brain like cenotes in a flat land, a Yucatan, treasures beyond guessing deep in silt. Some he gave to strangers, pressing them in their hands, wearing that mask of the bourgeois, greedier than ever not to be a poet. He escaped none of the worst part. Autumn already! Watching life condensed into clich&eacute;s the size of waterdrops at the edge of a tent! No peace, not even in silence. He might as well have had the words, all of the words, back. Imagine gathering them back now, from camel drivers, from the horizon that made them glitter by the hour! Could a more ridiculous sight be found  a six foot man with his leg cut off trying to balance himself on crutches. A cockroach upside down! The devils are laughing. And the world still wanting, all those words! On one knee he gathers up a few. Too late. Cups them in his hand, drinks them, weeps into them. And they are found there by the men who come to steal his twelve trunks, men who undo his hands and look for the words. But they do not know the words when they see them for they are new, strange, trembling, and earth seems to suffer under them. They are brushed off and left in the streets. This was the man Arthur Rimbaud who traded the madness of poetry for the madness of flight, seizing at money, tusks instead of words, a man who wanted passage from Aphinar to Suez, who said &ldquo;I am completely paralyzed, and so I am anxious to be on board early. Please tell me at what time I must be carried on board.&rdquo; This was a man who stared at the sands as if they would speak back to him, as if they would save him from crawling through the dense jungles of future tongues.
Born in this worldSityou sit down You got to sufferBreathe when you breathe Everything changesLie downyou lie down You gotno soulWalk where you walk Try to be gayTalk when you talk IgnoranthappyCry when you cry You get the bluesLie downyou lie down You eat jellyrollDie when you die There is one WayLook when you look You take the high roadHear what you hear In your big WheelTaste what you tastehere 8 steps you flySmell what you smell Look at the ViewTouch what you touch Right to horizonThink what you think Talk to the skyLet go Let it goSlow Act like you talkEarth Heaven &amp; Hell Work like the sunDie when you die Shine in your heavenDie when you die See what you doneLie downyou lie down Come down &amp; walkDie when you die
Icy trails, half a moose, horse slipping with hunter, the moose, the grass high as a horse, the heaviness of the brown bear, the dark of lit campsite, in the tall grass of the moose range. From the tall grass of the moose range the brown bear killed two hobbled horses with swat of hay rake, half a moose a large bale on the horsebit grass, the heaviness of the moose range, the sight in the dark, men on the moose range running in the tall grass of the brown bear. Start with breaking legs to slow them down, the shoulder in the rain and snow, night at thirty yards, tall grass of the horsebit moose range and the tall grass of the brown bear. To break shoulders legs of brown bear to aim for the neck in dark at thirty yards, in tall grass the moose range above timberline Jim Wilson
A daughter like the openwork of lace&equals;&equals;between the raised motif the field, formed by lines of thread called brides, shies back in order to let shine. The design from negative space shapes its figured river&equals;&equals;suns star&equals;&equals;the white thorns&equals;&equals;sperm&equals;&equals;and patterns verb the ground. Through the brides' or pearl-ties' airy flesh of net, wayward electrons spin with their absent grace and windowing through the opaque&equals;&equals;the dense omissions crystallize the lack that's lace. She is to be that yin of linen that dissolves under vision's dominion&equals;&equals;be the ground of silk that's burned away with lye&equals;&equals; the bride.
Today in a palace disguised as a museum, disguised myself as a tourist, I entered a crucifixion scene as part of the crowd and woke with the smell of ancient sweat in my nostrils, a bloody membrane over my eyes as if I were seeing the world through a crimson handkerchief  they tell me I fainted. Although I am in transit from my life, I packed stray bits of it to take along a comb with relics of my graying hair, snapshots of my own recent dead, books as thumbed as this Bible chained to the hotel bedpost, whose verses I read to put myself to sleep. At night in different beds I dream of home, but in the morning the dreams are gone like so much lost luggage. I know there are landscapes waiting to be entered: forests shaded in leaf green where winged children play on pipes; the blue translucent scales of water in seascapes. And on every wall are faces, gazing through an undertow of brush strokes. Meanwhile, framed in the evening windows of yet another city, the woman reflected is merely myself, the halo of light a streetlamp shining on my head. But ghosts clothed in tempora follow me everywhere, as if art itself were a purpling shadow whose territory I must step back into, a place where I can hide myself over and over again, where what is lost may be found, though always in another language and untranslatable.
The life of the world depends on that he is Alive, on that people are alive, on that There is village and village of them, without regard To that be-misted one and apart from her. Did we expect to live in other lives? We grew used so soon, too soon, to earth itself, As an element; to the sky, as an element. People might share but were never an element, Like earth and sky. Then he became nothing else And they were nothing else. It was late in the year. The wild ducks were enveloped. The weather was cold. Yet, under the migrations to solitude, There remained the smoke of the villages. Their fire Was central in distances the wild ducks could Not span, without any weather at all, except The weather of other lives, from which there could Be no migrating. It was that they were there That held the distances off: the villages Held off the final, fatal distances, Between us and the place in which we stood.
We come to silence slowly. Washed into the world on a wave of sound we leave it later with closed mouths, our tongues grown heavy as stones to anchor us in earth. Now we hear wind in the noisy leaves, a hubbub of water over the rocks, the musical warfare of the birds. Consider the ear shaped like the bass clef but empty. Consider the spaces between stars, soliloquies of light. It is almost time to hush the children, to quiet the dogs. Even your words grow muffled in my hair, soon it will be only touch I know you by. These are the corridors of silence; enter on tiptoe. Here Orpheus sleeps, his harp unstrung. Here the sound a leaf makes falling to ground may deafen us.
These hand-me-downs of Milton that I wear I wear well, we are a family baroque, ambitious for abundant joy except that we are duteous and severe. The fourteen verses of the sonneteer are thoughtful about this anomaly. In spite of us a passionate outcry interrupts. Things being what they are, mostly we are indignant as we write, God did not make the world to be the best but man has monstrously insulted it. At other times more gently we have witnessed, quite surprised, the being of some sweet friend like you, David, in the waste.
<>  And I like the smell of the trampled grass and elephants and hay. I take off my hat to the acrobat with his delicate, strong art,  And the motley mirth of the chalk-faced clown drives all my care away. I wish I could feel as they must feel, these players brave and fair,  Who nonchalantly juggle death before a staring throng. It must be fine to walk a line of silver in the air  And to cleave a hundred feet of space with a gesture like a song. Sir Henry Irving never knew a keener, sweeter thrill  Than that which stirs the breast of him who turns his painted face To the circling crowd who laugh aloud and clap hands with a will  As a tribute to the clown who won the great wheel-barrow race. Now, one shall work in the living rock with a mallet and a knife,  And another shall dance on a big white horse that canters round a ring, By another's hand shall colours stand in similitude of life;  And the hearts of the three shall be moved by one mysterious high thing. For the sculptor and the acrobat and the painter are the same.  They know one hope, one fear, one pride, one sorrow and one mirth, And they take delight in the endless fight for the fickle world's acclaim;  For they worship art above the clouds and serve her on the earth. But you, who can build of the stubborn rock no form of loveliness,  Who can never mingle the radiant hues to make a wonder live, Who can only show your little woe to the world in a rhythmic dress   What kind of a counterpart of you does the three-ring circus give? Well here in a little side-show tent to-day some people stand,  One is a giant, one a dwarf, and one has a figured skin, And each is scarred and seared and marred by Fate's relentless hand,  And each one shows his grief for pay, with a sort of pride therein. You put your sorrow into rhyme and want the world to look;  You sing the news of your ruined hope and want the world to hear; Their woe is pent in a canvas tent and yours in a printed book.  O, poet of the broken heart, salute your brothers here!
At the platform Everyone stands in little tributaries, one About every twenty feet. A man, a boat awash in his throat, lights A cigarette. You watch him. There is a slight indiscretion as a gentleman Lets a woman in line. Things return. You try to spark a conversation and settle into it. Things seem sandy; come to naught. You feel wet at the groin. You feel Like an interloper on the verge of a great conquest. The train speeds in. You get on, find a seat, hug your newspaper like armor. The man next to you speaks to you. The man next to him speaks to him. Everyone is speaking. You feel like speaking. You speak. Nothing has changed. The man next to you is up early. He has a son, an acrobat. You listen. Once you thought you might like to twist Yourself. The man moves on to his wife. Things fall out of her mouth like flying saucers, reincarnation. It is embarrassing. You remember you are five feet, seven inches tall. Will it get you anywhere? You suggest a new topic. He seems somewhat addled. Why Suggest that he steer clear of what so troubles him. The train gets to Grand Central Station. He gets off. You feel better. It is time To swing back into the world.
it buoys them up, floats ironwork off its pillars, lifts stonework, arches the footbridge into air, loosens everything; the waterlilies dance in sunlight above water all lit from within the beached cutter's hull, ragged shoreline, the bay's barrier of bright stones, fresh as a new world we only imagine  <> a kind of light heavy in the light that yellows her room at angles, she weighs upon herself like a building or a bridge  apparent stress, shoulders hunched forward, arms bearing their load downward into raised knees, feet and buttocks held firm spin any of them at the center and the colors whiten away, an early lesson, one color only and its varied absences
From north and south, from east and  west, Here in one shrieking vortex meet These streams of life, made manifest Along the shaking quivering street. Its pulse and heart that throbs and glows As if its strife were its repose. I shut my ear to such rude sounds As reach a harsh discordant note, Till, melting into what surrounds, My soul doth with the current float, And from the turmoil and the strife Wakes all the melody of life. The stony buildings blindly stare Unconscious of the crime within, While man returns his fellow's glare The secrets of his soul to win. And each man passes from his place, None heed. A shadow leaves such  trace.
Johnny are you there, are you there, are you there,  Johnny are you there lovely Johnny?   I can see the Demon Rum   bouncing on its little bum   at the bar of Kingdom Come and hear the thunder of the Crown and Anchor money. Whiskey are you there, are you there, are you there,  Whiskey are you there, whiskey honey?   O I've rolled the sweet potheen   in her beds among the green   hills of Blarney and I've been Counted out like the Crown and Anchor money.   I've seen diamonds and pearls   in the temporary curls   of the bar and tender girls    like Godivas,   and I've seen the chicadees   with the bottles on their knees   snoring underneath big trees    of lovely fivers. Whiskey are you there, are you there, are you there,  Whiskey are you there, O my honey?   When I begged you for a spot   that you hadn't even got   why, you gave me all the lot   every goddam precious jot   in a Crown and Anchor pot and we whistled up the wind for the money.
Once when I read the funnies I took my little magnifying glass and looked too close. Forms became colors and colors were just arrays of dots and between the dots I saw the rough bleak storyless legend of the pulp paper empty as the winter moon and I dreaded it. I had looked right through, when I wanted a universe that sustains looker and looking and the seen forever, detail after detail never ending. And all I had found was between. But between had its own song: Find it in the space between  it is just as empty as it seems but this blankness is your mother.
There is a legend of an old Hartz tower That tells of one, a noble, who had sold His soul unto the Fiend; who grew not old On this condition: that the Demon's power Cease every midnight for a single hour, And, in that hour, his body should lie cold With limbs up-shriveled, and with face, behold! Shrunk to a death's-head in the taper's glower.  So unto Sin Life gives his best. Her arts Make all his outward seeming beautiful Before the world; but in his heart of hearts Abides an hour when her strength is null; When he shall feel the death through all his parts Strike, and his countenance become a skull.
We are growing a bitter seed issue of poets who can't go home again in this here jar of a mag. Here are squat men in fat suits papillon greasy huddled in dark Chicago basements perched on writing tables to leap to Paris into Biedermeier inkstands. Prettiness of course isn't the issue when one has left behind all the pretty things and is now at the mercy of scents, happenstance, emigration, digestion. Nor is the issue courage or top form though both are necessary in order to play sweep over the borders of official forms that need be completed and punctuated. Not nostalgia not horror not righteousness though in various degrees these are the alarm clock perched on the wobbly armoire, child of one Eternity and an enraged grownup who saw Her bathing one day at the non- political shore of childhood and caused them to merge into a murderous infinity whose issue is fiery death and more death. For now they are kept apart by the writing hand: the pen prevents the closing of the fist and prices being what they are it's a good thing too. Not indignation intelligence rage though in various bourgeois measure these too once mixed well to steer the hornet nest of culture causing bees to rise from pamphlets into better print. Home is a car on the road to a cottage filled with storytelling mythmaking rustics leaning on a future composed of woven pelts, miles of sausages, milk and approximate figures which form the antihistorical peak where one rests in the company of national fiction at its most formal ease under a sky of homespun ambiguities and goat. No those are not the issues though each line makes the jar buzz and sets the fashion free. The issue is ease, and when. The bitterness thereof is the lack of it, the Sunday afternoon going to bad movies made by people one knows slightly, then letting the haze of a cigarette over Turkish coffee push the country forward, a miraculous machine that is the opposite of a cement truck.
Of course I said it couldn't be. I didn't speak, I was too troubled, My hands spoke for me, Pushing the notion away. He said his name was Gabriel, Meaning a man of God, Though his wings were plain to see. He was deferential, He even brought me flowers. I'd never entertained an angel. And what a blessing, that Nobody else was there, Only our cat  She arched her back and skittered Off as if she'd met A huge avenging bird! He talked of a fortunate fall, But didn't explain who fell. Joseph, he vowed, was a just man (So he was, and decent as well), And I was simply a vessel. Later somebody pictured the scene And there was Jehovah, propped on a cloud, Pointing right at me As if to say, &lsquo;That's the one I mean!&rsquo; Turning and twisting in his gorgeous gown Like a wrathful old grandee. Thank heaven my eyes were cast down, That really would have scared me. For if you are pregnant no matter How strange it may be you must spare Yourself these shocks and scares. I think my hands turned into a prayer. At least the child would have a mother. When there's something or other They want, they're angels, They bring you flowers. But when the hour came Where was the father, where was He? Well, it was always much the same, I guess it always will be.
Numbered day, night only just beginning, be born very slowly, stay with me, impossible to name. Do I know you, Miss Death, by your warrant, your heroine's head pinned against my hero's shoulder? The seraphim are as cold to each other in Paradise: and the room of a dying man is open to everyone. The knitting together of your two spines is another woman reminding of a wife, his life surrounds you as a sun, consumes your light. Are you waiting to be fertilized, dynamic death, by his dark company? To be warmed in your wretched overnight lodgings by his kind words and small talk and powerful movements? He breaks away from your womb to talk to me, he speaks so with my consciousness and not with words, he's in danger of becoming a poetess. Roaming root of multiple meanings, he shouts himself out in your narrow amphora, your tasteless, because immortal, wine. The instant of recognition is unsweet to him, scarecrow word sealed up, second half of a poetic simile lost somewhere. Most foreign and cherished reader, I cannot live without your trans-sense language, the living furrow of your spoken words that plough up time. Instead of the real past with its deep roots, I have yesterday, I have minutes when you burn up the past with your raspberry-coloured farewell that shears the air. Bypassing everything, even your frozen body, with your full death, the no-road-back of your speaking flesh.
Back in the old days when the human american body still (it must have been 1965) had plausible sensations a man stood in an empty room in Boston. To whom a woman entered and they touched. Touched a lot, made out just standing there and the sun came in the dusty windows and winter traffic fumbled down Beacon Street audibly an alley away. They feared to lie on the dirty floor or feared each other too much to lie down. And the fear turned into feeling and the feeling worked. But they or so they  never did it again, never went (as they both thought of it, quaintly) further. And years (or but years) later, in the middle of all the everything else each of them knew they had come as far as there is to go. This is you, and this is me and here between us suddenly an energy where we are not two. And there is no between. And then there was  even their last caresses on the stairs down to the street were closures, formal, epilogue and undertow. He thinks back: I knew her body then, better than my own. And she: things seldom look like our names for them. Love is easy. That was feeling. Horncall. Deer vanishing over the hill.
Once on a beach in Mexico having eaten and drunk of the cactus of longing I looked at the sea so long it became a wall with many windows lit from inside and I could hear a voice, but the words were unclear. I thought I was dying, but I started walking anyway along the edge of the surf until I was a thing of the surf continually washed up and pulled back the way my legs as a child were taken by the surf in play, the way the wing of a dead gull rose and fell and rose in the water as though it were trying to fly. Then the wall collapsed and the lights went out. There was nothing under my feet, nothing to hear, nothing to see. I was falling and falling, falling away, then coming back, somehow, like an astronaut harnessed to a station, dreamless in digital light, but coming back in a small arced blaze above the beach. And there I was, unharmed, it seemed. I went on walking toward a memory like a star you have to look away from in order to see.
All the stops here have exotic names: <> I know no one, grow invisible in that state. Each time the language inverts dyslexic on my tongue, I tell myself I belong here. But I lie. The money is soft, spiral pastels in my hand. My clothes are obvious to native eyes, skin too white by their easy browns. I have yet to learn the major roads, not stare when men walk arm-in-arm, their faces smooth. The bus brakes at Cypress Fire, trees rise like dark flames. Bodies stammer on, laugh with dense conversation. Let this year abrogate itself. Below me, the Aegean harbor swallows the sky and I am a newcomer in an old house. My stop of One Thousand Trees. I wander to my room with one bed, one chair, one picture tacked on a wall, and write to Elaine: <> <> <>
<> The wing catch of arrested flight, The stop midway and then off: off for triangles, circles, loops of new hieroglyphs  This is April's way: a woman: &ldquo;O yes, I'm here again and your heart knows I was coming.&rdquo; White pigeons rush at the sun, A marathon of wing feats is on: &ldquo;Who most loves danger? Who most loves wings? Who somersaults for God's sake in the name of wing power in the sun and blue on an April Thursday.&rdquo; So ten winged heads, ten winged feet, race their white forms over Elmhurst. They go fast: once the ten together were a feather of foam bubble, a chrysanthemum whirl speaking to silver and azure. The child is on my shoulders. In the prairie moonlight the child's legs hang over my shoulders. She sits on my neck and I hear her calling me a good horse. She slides down and into the moon silver of a prairie stream She throws stone and laughs at the clug-clug.
Not all the bravery that day puts on Of gold and azure, ardent or austere, Shall ease my soul of sorrow; grief, more dear Than all the joy that heavenly hope may don. Far up the skies the rumor of the dawn May run, and eve like some wild torch appear; These shall not change the darkness, gathered here, Of thought that rusts like an old sword undrawn. Oh, for a place far-sunken from the sun! A wildwood cave of primitive rocks and moss! Where Sleep and Silence breast to married breast  Lie with their child, night-eyed Oblivion; Where, freed from all the burden of my cross, I might forget, I might forget and rest!
His body is buried in the land. You are buried here: this place where your voice is a disused mine. You mime the same sentence. The sound gets stuck. Life. Life. You wait for the time that never comes. Days slide into nights, waiting. Nights long like years in a small room. You learn to speak from your stomach. Your voice box lies in the ocean. The sea's bed is softer than this one. The wind sings through cells. You buried something and forgot where you put it. Years ago. Maybe you even forgot what you buried. How it went. What the tune was. Remembering is dying slowly. Every night, a heaviness spreads over thin, inadequate sheets, violates, sharp, sudden, staying till morning. Till the unlocking when Cleopatra comes with her big keys and lets you out. You wash, but the smell comes back again. Again, a song's refrain. Dying is remembering slowly. Slipping away. Walking the same coastline until your body steps like land slides into the sea  under the path people will later walk over.
Gulls think it is for them that the wormy sand rises, brooding on its few rights, losing its war with water. The mussel flats ooze out, and now the barnacled, embossed, stacked rocks are pedestals for strangers, for my own strange sons scraping in the pools, imperilling their pure reflections. Their bodies are less beautiful than blue heaven's pleiades of herring gulls, or gannets, or that sloop's sail sawtoothing the sea as if its scenery were out of date, as if its photographs had all been taken: two boys left naked in a sloughed off summer, skins and articulate backbones, fossils for scrapbook or cluttered mantelpiece. If you look now, quickly and askance, you can see how the camera's eye perfected what was motion and chance before it clicked on this day and childhood snapshot, scarcely seen beside hunched football stripes and ugly uniforms. Shy, familiar grins in a waste of faces. My knee joints ache and crack as I kneel to my room's fire, feeding it. Steam wreathes from my teacup, clouding the graduate, the lieutenant, the weddings, the significant man of letters, the politician smiling from his brief victory. Faces I washed and scolded, only watched as my each child laboured from his own womb, bringing forth, without me, men who must call me mother, love or reassess me as their barest needs dictate, return dreaming, rarely to this saltpool in memory, naked on a morning full of see-through jellyfish, with the tide out and the gulls out grazing on healed beaches, while sea-thrift blazes by the dry path, and the sail stops cutting the water to pieces heading for some named port inland. Their voices return like footprints over the sandflats, permanent, impermanent, salt and sensuous as the sea is, in its frame, its myth.
gates round about me I knew &amp; you know &amp; she had compassion (alive) a carcass a carcass &amp; a dancing carcass &amp; I will kill the fat &amp; the fat ones the wicked the he-goats your mistress conceived like a coat &amp; torn off like the twenty those you ran over &amp; numbered &amp; like those I will kill
Retire, my daughter;  Prayers have been said; Take your warm water  And go to bed. But I had rather  Sit up instead. I am your father,  So go to bed. Are you my father? I think so, rather:  You go to bed. My daughter, vanish;  You hear me speak: This is not Spanish,  Nor is it Greek. Oh, what a bother!  Would I were dead! I am your mother,  So go to bed. Are you my mother? You have no other:  You go to bed. Take your bed-candle  And take it quick. This is the handle. Is   No, that's the wick. <>  At this end here. Take your bed-candle  And disappear.  Oh dear, oh dear! Take your warm water,  As we have said; You are our daughter,  So go to bed. Am I your daughter? If not, you oughter:  You go to bed. I am their daughter; If not, I oughter:  Prayers have been said. This is my mother; I have no other:  Would I were dead! That is my father; He thinks so, rather:  Oh dear, oh dear! I take my candle; <>  I disappear.  The coast is clear.
Sorrowful dreams remembered after waking Shadow with dolour all the candid day; Even as I read, the silly tears out-breaking Splash on my hands and shut the page away.... Grief at the root, a dark and secret dolour, Harder to bear than wind-and-weather grief, Clutching the rose, draining its cheek of colour, Drying the bud, curling the opened leaf. Deep is the pond although the edge be shallow, Frank in the sun, revealing fish and stone, Climbing ashore to turtle-head and mallow  Black at the centre beats a heart unknown. Desolate dreams pursue me out of sleep; Weeping I wake; waking, I weep, I weep.
I hoed and trenched and weeded,  And took the flowers to fair: I brought them home unheeded;  The hue was not the wear. So up and down I sow them  For lads like me to find, When I shall lie below them,  A dead man out of mind. Some seed the birds devour,  And some the season mars, But here and there will flower  The solitary stars, And fields will yearly bear them  As light-leaved spring comes on, And luckless lads will wear them  When I am dead and gone.
Sorry, but in the Mahler I hear approach and retreat further out even than language. I had to think of the music entering the cone of a hibiscus at its widest open moment, knowing the flower's movement from most present to most gone takes one day only, briefest resolution, like a heard note or notes in any combination, however long. Brief, however deep, like the buoyant silence after an applause. In Donatello's figure of the aged Magdalene, the raised hands are caught, held apart just so, one coming to the other in the gesture for prayer, not touching, held there arguing <> <> Oh my God, is grief more true than love? My father had a problem with his hands, growths on the tendons drew his fingers into fists, in years. God bless the women passing needles to their girls, and hooks, any word or flower can be embroidered with the  can last, sweet home sweet home. I saw the face of a beaded evening bag, minutest iridescent beads in rose and deeper rose, and black. Someone stopped sewing before being done, stopped at the fringe, the most decorative part of the decorative thing. She left the threaded needle in. What grief was it, as those hours spent readying the rare occasion stopped, the bag not done but not undone? One bead is a beautiful thing. We won't all die at once. Hold one bead in your hand and keep from thinking of the next one if you can.
Returned to my town of trees, the summers start their love in leaf, and flower in the walls; into the medaled morning, April falls as far as the acre from heart to heart. In white aisles of my chest and chaliced bones another flower starts in deeper farms. Christened with light and capped with hidden thorns I sleep in the crypt and cradle of your arms. Now boated back, wept on my river home, I see the wasp-and-violet-scattered mountain, once a dark pasture of obsidian when last I left it wrapped in rain and storm, ablaze in its armor of bonfire-fountains and final, miracle meridian.
I sit beside old retired Italians. They chat, and have smooth skins. Their hair is white, and the flesh full. They make no disturbance. They rest all day, sitting in a park. One will come over from his house and add to the crowd. They never grow loud. They talk and laugh, solid company every day. I love to come here and sit with them, I a stranger, and feel the quiet and stability they make, and lasting custom.
True love, true love, what have I done  That I can find no rest? Only the breaking of this bed rock  Nightlong in my breast. True love, true love, what have I done  To drive such a scissoring wind Over the seas of my sleep like  A harpy of the mind? True love, true love, what have I done  That, wherever I go, I walk upon that sobbing fossil   Eros in the snow. True love, true love, what have I done?   So violent a thing. That every wind and word a witness  Against my breath will bring? True love, true love, what have I done  Save watch it sail away That gold haired shell with Aphrodite  Nailed to a prow of clay? True love, true love, what have I done?  O never and never return! I have seen the lightning whip the shrouds  And watched the mermaids burn. True love, true love, what have I done  That I can find no rest? The wormwood head, the gilded image  Sink weeping in the west. True love, true love, what have I done?  In assuaging sea I drown, but still the fishes whisper  Love without end to me.
O kind watchers came To the starlit wood ... <> <> <> <> <> <> And while they watched And waited, listening For some word of their Father ... There was only the wind's sound Shaking the last leaves down That and the terrible noise Of the wound wound wound Which the world was making.
It was a time when sparrows lifted their voices above the nightingales. The lonely ones sang to their aloneness; the audiences were the sparrows'. Autumn arrived; the nightingales migrated. The sparrows died off in their myriads. The frost chirruped in places where they had sat fast. From bone galleries the audiences had gone. In the hot south featherless shadows fell upon ruined cities that had never heard the nightingales sing.
This opening of Joy  the motion of the Lord upon the soul  makes possible in our life in time an intimation of that Light which that of God causes to glow in every soul. Henceforth we cherish the legend that is to come, the vision that precedes us as we go through the wicket of the possible. It is time to begin to prove it is so. Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple, I will write upon him the name of the city ... There is the blaze of history's trail, where the tree is slashed in the dark wood, tentatively marking the faded track of those who came here long ago intending good, tending to what necessity seemed to make the one choice possible whenever there was choice. Listen  in the clamor of their voices, in the muddle of their deeds, see, there's a design where words like fallen leaves, like falls of snow have muffled, have baffled and half-hidden the structure of reality:
The taxis circle round the square taking people from places to places. It's mid-December in WC1. The day is over, the bulb lingers on. <> He stole the fork in a curry place, now there's guilt written sweaty all over his face. <> In the hallway it's Christmas, on the stairs it's goodwill as he forks in the meat and it makes him feel ill. <> He's sick in the basin, he's sick in the bin. He's empty as history, lonely as sin. <> And the taxis circle round the square taking people from places to places.
In the Bay of Fundy the clams lie stranded, half-dry, by the tides forty feet higher than sea in killdeer's kingdom. Underground, they erect valved snouts. Wet freckles sprout over the beach: Each trickles a droplet, and each attests to the desperate hope that attends each ritual drop. Lie ten-hours-buried in sand and the swirl of salt and the wet seems an Age before suffering began. All shrinks in the rage of the sun save the courage of clams, and their faith: Sacrificing the water they breathe seems to urge the tall moon from her orbit; she tugs ocean, cubit by cubit over killdeer's kingdom and ends parched freedom. Moon, with sky-arching shell and bright snout nine thousand miles long and anemones in her kelp hair that gleam in the heaven around her, responds with the wave of their prayers or sucks the sea unawares.
The flat year, when summer never arrived grass lived green to August and we buried love under the grass and marked the grave with a stick. Wherever we went that fall, Mexico City, Istanbul, we vowed to go back next year and dig love up, resurrect love, make love something for the ages. We planned disciples and a book big as the Bible. It was all set, even the witnesses historians believe. Years later, we found the stick knocked down by rain, but the spot was certain, there twelve paces from the apple tree, on a line with the bay and the anchored freighter we knew would never move. We dug and dug. Two moons went by. No love. We rechecked memory and map and still only brown dirt and the earthworms twisting away. We should never have named what we buried. We know now it wasn't love. Nor a tin can packed with diamonds. Whatever it was, dead cat, dead salmon, it flourished only when skies are odd, when the summer we expect fails and those abnormal rains keep the world green longer than the eye takes to imagine &ldquo;nothing certain&rdquo; instead of &ldquo;love&rdquo; on the headstone, rivers fat and trout spawning year round as if September will not end.
&ldquo;Look!&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;all green!&rdquo; but she, leaning against him at her hospital door, received it on her eyes as fireline blinding bright and would not see. &ldquo;Come into the park!&rdquo; he offered her, but she was feverstruck still, brimful of white monotonous weakness, and could not face the grass and the bright water. A boy skating upstreet shouted; the gardener climbed at the doorway, pruning, and the gay branches dropped where she stood, fearful of her quick heartbeat released, fearing the kiss of vivid blood. The husband straightened in the sun, risking their staggered histories against the violent avenue's emphasis; &ldquo;A long pain, long fever!&rdquo; He faced her full for the first time, speaking, turned with his hand her face to meet his mouth, &ldquo;but that death's over.&rdquo; Lights out; noon falls steeply away, blazing in green; he sees the sharp fear pass verdict upon her, pitching and frothing toward the mechanical white walls.
At midnight in the trysting wood  I wandered by the waterside, When, soft as mist, before me stood  My sweetheart who had died. But so unchanged was she, meseemed  That I had only dreamed her dead; Glad in her eyes the lovelight gleamed;  Her lips were warm and red. What though the stars shone shadowy through  Her form as by my side she went, And by her feet no drop of dew  Was stirred, no blade was bent! What though through her white loveliness  The wildflower dimmed, the moonlight paled, Real to my touch she was; no less  Than when the earth prevailed. She took my hand. My heart beat wild.  She kissed my mouth. I bowed my head. Then, gazing in my eyes, she smiled:  &ldquo;When did'st thou die?&rdquo; she said.
We picture gentler animals stopping to paw the soil where we rise up. Our curious flesh gleams softly like freshly turned roots. The rabbit's a stranger to us by the unstitching of genes through thousands of years' breeding. How peeled and soft-skinned we'll look in the sun! like hazelnuts plump in the dark or sweet chestnuts sheathed round with spines until the air hardens them. The sky will be blue as a bolt of Victorian air-blue, the sun butter-coloured, the earth shouldering its way buoyantly. We come back to earth where nothing's preserved but what has sunk back and died as we did. The earth's brown crumb is soft after frost and ready for planting. The rabbits lift up their heads feeling the light tremors under them lengthen and the crust heave as new bodies slip through it shedding their wet, rag-patterned gleam like fish in the iridescent first seconds of landing.
For now, among the falling of the ochres, Reds and yellows, in which haze the many  Casualties of what on earth Went on here this month, re-fuse, this joker's Pockets open out and he digs for money. His the face suggested to, spat on, In which the door and final door were shut,  The mother of which saw and lost At stations, and the quizzes of the Western Shows made to a shape you don't forget: Human of the Revolution, soul We would wouldn't we be if our dreams  Loomed amateur cine of tanks Slowing round our corner and the whole Hope thing holed and fumbling in own homes  For now he buys and smokes and his rivered mug Grins above the inhalation. It all  Rustles by beyond him now, The elbowing to run the show, the lag Of bloody onus, economic stall, The eloquence and begging in the States And books of what it was, means, portends.  Photographed and asked, he moves His hand to what, to offer cigarettes Nobody takes. He takes and lights one, stands And leaves, astonishing the siding rich With just being. The love sticks on the tongue.  He goes his way, who went his way, Where talk is meant and lit, at the throat's hutch, On streets of blood, in caf&eacute;s of the lung.
<>  And trod th' eternal word; To every ball its limits held,  The universe was stirred. World embryons, in chaos rolled,  Knew system at her cry, And hoary planets ages cold  Policed anew the sky. Suns came and sun's star's satellites  To sing Dulcina's power, And myriad moons left myriad nights  To keep a pagan hour. In rebel red extravagance  The flaming legions came; In her transplendent brilliance  They paled to candle flame, And praised above all dams her dam,  And gave her sire reward, And hailed me blest o'er all who am  Her bondsman and her bard; Who sees in her all things glassed fair,  And Paradise would fly, That wanting her were angel-bare  And drear felicity.
Insomnia is your cocktail tobacco, records, books marked on loveseat, ironing board. Didn't he ramble' in highwire breezed Berkshires gambling in innocence, the gunnery the long road you walk in your father's shoes. Your children all legitimate in their touching you when you stopped writing poems for their classroom; they rise, pipesmoke flues you stoked filling with kindling. Deep, thorough, the conspiracy to silence you they will not know; your allies drop from disease, dying quietly in retirement behind the lines. On these you stand. Sons, daughters, honor you. From nearest perch they wait word, laughing in mourning at your tales. Some things must be told to be remembered: that you taught in kingship; Mrs. Bibbie, &lsquo;Big Boy&rsquo; Davis, J. C. Moreland, Sporting Daniels; that you rode the trains, conceived in church: listen, it is late, frost polishes these keys in the  where the mockingbirds lie; we have built off you, we have stolen from you, we have loved you and must tell you so, just in time always too late.
But by the trigonometry of wit canalised into those luxuriant tracts where monsters of imaginative pride writhe in the harsh nets of Scholastic writ. That tangled growth of intellect and passion, where thought spread sensuous, mental love's last acts, where doubt's exuberance even doubt defied, thrust skywards in the noon-day of ambition. Till in a flash which humbled that rich Earth Donne saw Time's handiwork on the bodies of men, and Death, squat in each wrinkle as a trench, sniping the careless heads of Love and Mirth. He wooed God &lsquo;like an angel from a cloud&rsquo;, preaching; but sometimes the more faithful pen revived a metaphor that had trapped a wench and shames the dandy in the wimpled shroud.
In the morning, while Kalika combs her seven-year-old daughter's glossy tangled hair, she looks at her face in the mirror; red-eyed, worn out, she feels she has grown into a mangy stranger overnight. Her daughter's face: wide open eyes so much more like her mother's who died last night in a diabetic coma. As Kalika parts the hair in the centre, a straight line curving down the back of her daughter's head; she remembers, five years ago blisters on the back of her mother's head grew and grew, never healing, her mother's scalp cracked and bleeding until the doctor shaved off the waist-length thick grey hair and tightly bandaged the head. As Kalika watches her daughter open the door the sun falls on the bright red ribbons flowering at the ends of the freshly made braids, and there is her mother in a red sari, walking towards the sound of temple bells. Green herbs, white jasmine in her hands, tiny red blossoms woven in her coiling hair. Later, tearing out sticky cobwebs from corners in the high ceiling, while jabbing at fleeing spiders with a long-handled broom, Kalika winces, glances out the window and sees her daughter on the lawn struggling with her doll's matted hair.
If we are dying, let's do it slowly, together. Are dolphins ever tired? The way we have been leaping about the steamship  as if it ran on our hot breaths; the way we have been yelling as if our lungs were bellows for the furnace of that gentle, violent vessel; the way we gasp and clutch each other like drowning sailors, then die to find another life, ourselves transformed and kissing easily as fish or playing like dolphins over waves, or tossing like the waves themselves above the sea-bed, after having beaten around our respective and respectable bushes on dry land for so long  I am turned around, not sure if we are found or foundering. There is a storm above the waves and one below, but for all our sweet struggle, the churning all around, our sporting in the wake, the ship appears to be more or less on course. We sight a new world daily.
O beggar, you've made me a beggar,   what more do you need? My mendicant, what's this beseeching song   you sing as you walk by?  Every morning with riches new  to please you was my heart's desire,   my mendicant! Alas, in a flash I placed all at your feet;   nothing's now left. O beggar, you've made me a beggar,   what more do you need? With my own breast's cloth-end   I've clothed your nakedness. For your pleasure I've   emptied my universe.  My heart, my mind, my life's springtime  already lie in your cupped palms,   my mendicant! Should you want more, give me something first;   then can I hand it back.
The petty fury that disrupts my life  at the striking of a wrong key as if it had been a woman lost or a fortune.. The man was obviously drunk, Christopher Marlowe could have been no drunker when he got himself stuck through the eye with a poniard. The bus station was crowded. The man heavy-set about my own age seventy was talking privately with a sailor. He had an ugly jaw on him. Suddenly sitting there on the bench too drunk to stand he began menacingly his screaming. The young sailor who could have flattened him at one blow kept merely looking at him. The nerve-tingling screeches that sprang <> from that stubble beard would have distinguished an operatic tenor. But me  the shock of it  my heart leaped in my chest so that I saw red wanted to strangle the guy. The fury of love is no less.
Some things you say how sweet to. A widowed aunt's wax fruit. Painting: Indian Humble in Sunset. The Lord's Prayer embroidered on a spread. What you do is fake feeling, try to accept faint tries at creation. Take this feeble fountain  a gesture to Rome. And though flowers actually bloom they don't seem to. Maybe petals are sparse or light from the sea is too strong and washes the color out. Anyway, it's wrong. The trees are too lean, the children who run through the trees too noisy, not charming. Here, if you fall in love, it's love, or flight from a desperate gray you didn't care to suffer again brought on by this almost protestant park. By the time those bells stopped ringing your wedding, the swordfish they sell in the park would be sold, the fruit stand closed, children safe in their caves. You'd wonder who this strange girl you married is, holding your arm, and why when sun was still noon you couldn't have stayed the man you were, faintly created, finding your failures warm to come home to and your fantasy clean.
He's given me his  secret, alone, in Love's name, for what sake I have only in faith. Where it is...? How it is near...? I would recognize him by the way he walks. But it was so long ago and I was never sure &point; except in his regard and then sure as the rose scattering its petals to prepare is sure for the ripeness near to the perfection of the rose. I would know the red  where thought too curls about, opens out from, what's hid, until it falls away, all the profuse allusion let go, the rose-hip persistence of the truth hid therein from me enduring.
It is blue May. There is work to be done. The spring's eye blind with algae, the stopped water silent. The garden fills with nettle and briar. Dylan drags branches away. I wade forward with my scythe. There is stickiness on the blade. Yolk on my hands. Albumen and blood. Fragments of shell are baby-bones, the scythe a scalpel, bloodied and guilty with crushed feathers, mosses, the cut cords of the grass. We shout at each other each hurting with a separate pain. From the crown of the hawthorn tree to the ground the willow warbler drops. All day in silence she repeats her question. I too return to the place holding the pieces, at first still hot from the knife, recall how warm birth fluids are.
<> loom over you; the gaunt and graceless room, faced squarely, wheel back bright; the curtain part over the rocking heart. Lifting the head up from its warm cave, will tears swarm sudden over a lonely arm? As rain wrecks silence or sparkles dark, so morning may be marred by memory, marked by remembrance as an enemy. Fooled in sleep, are you now surprised at this pitiable, pale paradise? The day world wading toward you, pier by pier? Where once you washed so steep in sleep hung with a dumb weight, frozen and caught, there tragedy was secure and terror pure; the beasts at last roamed back into their towns and the remote miles of bone. Within that ravening sleep you heralded danger at least with a splitting cry; dodged death in instant recognition; gathered breath. So hope is restored at morning with a solider despair. You suffer pity when you wake, widening the stone gaze to include a signal solitude, a chalk and marble maze. Each ghost floats forward with a famished face. Discover yourself so deeply occupied, so weaponless, it empties terror even, exposing a faded heaven. As the branched sleep is broken, the tears harden, and the tongue is tired, not yet having spoken. As the heart shrinks and the five fingers relax their star, waking brings back, not where we were, but where we are.
Sprawled in the pigsty, snouts nudging snuffling him  a naked old man with bloodstained wings. Fallen from the August sky? Dead? Alive? But he twists away from the cattle-prod, wings jerking, lifts his grizzled head, regarding all with searching eyes. Neither smiles nor threats, dumbshow nor lingua franca were of any use to those trying for clues to him. They could not make him hide his nakedness in their faded hand-me-downs. Humane, if hostile and afraid, they spread him a pallet in the chicken-house. The rooster pecked his wings. Leftovers were set out for him; he ate sunflowers instead and the lice crawling his feathers. Carloads of the curious paid his clever hosts to see the actual angel? carny freak? in the barbedwire pen. They crossed themselves and prayed his blessing; catcalled and chunked at him. In the dark his heavy wings open and shut, stiffly spread like a wooden butterfly's. He leaps, board wings clum- sily flapping, big sex flopping, falls. The hawk-haunted fowl flutter and squawk; panic squeals ill the sty. He strains, am awk- ward patsy, sweating strains leaping falling. Then  silken rustling in the air, the angle of ascent achieved.
Packing to move, I unearth something swaddled and heavy, my grandfather's Winchester pump, Model 12, stock sheenless and smoothed by a family of hands, the smell I would know in any dark of closet or crypt, its great boom and yellow lick of delight lashing the canopied undershadow of woods while morning's blue trickled October dawn. We sat on the log. Eleven squirrels once. Eleven times he stood and at noon his bag-coat hung, seams seeping from small bodies he carried. Mine then was the .22, short-barreled clicker, now on my son's wall. It was as new as I was, sharp- sighted, never fired, but right-sized, at any event, for pretending. At the stream we must cross that cold day he pointed, then spread his palm on twelve gold cartridges. Six shots high, the red woodpecker stoically waited. Then five times he climbed up the wounded trunk and turned on me the dark eye that said,  Going home in his vaulted Hudson, the James River gray rocking below, I watched oystermen tonging in red baseball caps, their motions like applause. Wordless as a log, he stared ahead. Later, his hands dried, rough, he held out the pail with pink chips of flesh rising and falling. And eleven shapes. &ldquo;Remember,&rdquo; he said. Did he mean his careful, least gestures? Those gutted entrails that bore blue shadows amid the bloodied water? Pumping the breech so it clanged open, he held the channel for me to look. From far down the sweet oil rose like pine sap at autumn's end glazing the bright hollow, spotting our ancestral stock. At the window, wrapped in Grandfather's stained coat, I lift the family gun and break it open. My son, eleven, obliviously climbs a tree. Aiming beyond him toward home, I remember that woodpecker, its odd knowledge, the way it flared with lazy yellow wings into the dark that spread in my body, and the lashing smell of the Model 12 in a white room where old eyes scissored, cut for me, and waited.
Two eyes, two hands  in one two are given. The words are messages from another, not understood but given. Neither one, nor the other, nor of a brother but in the one, two, restless, confined to a place ruled by a moon, and another one with messages, rather, sequences of words that are not to be understood but somehow given to a world. All this dances in a room, two by two, but alone. From one to two, is the first rule. Of two minds the twin is to double life given. What it says is that one is two, the twin, that the messenger comes to either, that these fight to possess, but do not understand that if the moon rules, there is &ldquo;domestic harmony&rdquo; but if the blood cry, the split so divide, there can be no company for the two in one. He is alone.
May you love leaves, complete vet unfulfilled, Dancing in the light, in the shade where light is stilled. May the wild woodpecker, knocking on the hollow Treetrunk remind you, and the voice of the late swallow That distance is mortal. May you then run complete Into that circle created by your feet And may you be astounded, when the rest are gone, By the chill water splashing on the stone. Wait, then, for patience is the friend of love, Wait, on the last breath, last echo where you move, Then it shall come, the miracle you sought, Not in the leaves, nor in your own thought, Joy will surround you, which you thought had fled, In safety, in silence, in the steps of the dead.
What ever happened to Hermie Giuffre? We took our clothes off on the upper screened porch of the green house grandfather built before the War It was raining My small brother hid behind a rocking chair I guess what I was thinking was how different I am from that boy, and What's wrong with that? The word &ldquo;naked,&rdquo; the word &ldquo;penis&rdquo; The storm rocked us My companion went crazy thinking he was Lord Randall crawling with eels, poisoned by his mother He held me down, first time, talked smoothly about sex His hair &amp; skin were luminous I thought of him as &ldquo;saint,&rdquo; &ldquo;victim,&rdquo; &ldquo;mad&rdquo; He was like a twin brother all golden I saw myself as Medieval sun-girl He taught me pleasure, the meaning of &ldquo;heart's sorrow&rdquo; In the Winter dream I had a son named A-Man, who could speak in tongues When the nurse, in life, said &ldquo;It's a girl,&rdquo; I knew she was wrong He cut me like a man.
<> Service and hope, see love and brotherhood Far off as ever, it will do no good For you to wear his thorns upon your brow For doubt of him. And should you question how To serve him best, he might say, if he could, &ldquo;Whether or not the cross was made of wood Whereon you nailed me, is no matter now.&rdquo; Though other saviors have in older lore A Legend, and for older gods have died  Though death may wear the crown it always wore And ignorance be still the sword of pride  Something is here that was not here before, And strangely has not yet been crucified.
Pound on the door it's our house like clockwork go in and out cities are flooded, fall, everywhere is a place tree line wall porch window face corner branch form climates build variouscircles over and round the earth flies pause at the ceiling or above a chair sleep solid wild shadows same thing and what else
What shall be said to him,  Now he is dead? Now that his eyes are dim,  Low lies his head? What shall be said to him,  Now he is dead? One thing, he knew not of,  Sweet, in his ear Whisper with all thy love   Haply he'll hear. One thing, he knew not of,  Sweet, in his ear. What shall be given him,  Now he is dead? Now that his eyes are dim,  Low lies his head? What shall be given him,  Now he is dead? That which was long denied  Here, Sweet, thy heart Lay now his heart beside,  Never to part. That which was long denied  Here, Sweet, thy heart.
Ten years, and it's still on the Radio.  Spills out of a dozen windows Onto the canal. A woman And her son in a vegetable Barge sing it. A man polishing The prow of his gondola Sings it while his dog wags its tail. Children playing hopscotch sing it. Grimy half washed clothes hang overhead. Garbage floats in the narrow canal. More radios join in. Across The canal, beyond the iron windows Of the Women's Prison, a hundred Pure voices of pickpockets And prostitutes start to sing it. It is just like being in church. The next number is
You tell me how helpless you are to leave. I listen, detached as you prefer me. I hear screams from the building across the grass, and laughter. I scan your face as calm as mine. We continue to sit under a shady tree. I blotted him out with a drop of ink. I absorbed him in my blotter. Now when I look I find him under a scratched-out word under the influence of the  eyes lowered, smiling, finding in himself that pleasure that was crossed out for him, his face calm and good. He has his dream and will not raise his eyes to give it up. I stretch out a hand, a warding off of evil, and it is grasped limply as you smile, your eyes still averted. We get up from the grass and go for coffee at the Exchange.
<> And words to sledge an iron argument, And yet you could draw down the outland birds To perch beside the ravens of your thought  The dreams whereby a people challenges Its dooms, its bounds. You were the one who knew What sacred resistance is in men That are almost broken; how, from resistance used, A strength is born, a stormy, bright-eyed strength Like Homer's Iris, messenger of the gods, Coming before the ships the enemy Has flung the fire upon. Our own, our native strength You mustered up. But I will never say this, Walking beside you, or looking on you, With your strong brow, and chin was like a targe, And eyes that were so kindly of us all. And sorrow comes as on that August day, With our ship cleaving through the seas for home, And that news coming sparkling through the air, That you were dead, and that we'd never see you Looking upon the state that you had builded. The news that came was like that weight of waters Poured on our hopes! Our navies yet unbuilded, Our city left inglorious on its site, Our fields uncleared, and over Our ancient house the ancient curse of war! And could we pray, touching the island-homeland, Other than this: &ldquo;Odysseus, you who laboured So long upon the barren outer sea; Odysseus, Odysseus, you who made The plan that drove the wasters from the house, And bent the bow that none could bend but you: Be with us still: Your memory be the watcher in our house, Your memory be the flame upon our hills.&rdquo;
Shafts of light, that poured from the August sun, Glowed on long red walls of the gallery cool; Fell upon monstrous visions of ages gone, Still, smiling Sphinx, winged and bearded Bull. With burnished breast of ebon marble, queen And king regarded full, from a tranquil brain Enthroned together, conquered Time; serene In spite of wisdom, and older than ancient pain. Hither a poor woman, with sad eyes, came, And vacantly looked around. Their strange motionless features, touched with flame, Awed her: in humble wonder she hurried past; And shyly beneath a sombre monument sought Obscurity; into the darkest shade she crept And rested: soon, diverted awhile, her thought Returned to its own trouble. At last she slept. Not long sweet sleep alone her spirit possest. A dream seized her: a solemn and strange dream. For far from home in an unknown land, opprest By burning sun, in the noon's terrible beam She wandered; around her out of the plain arose Immense Forms, that high above her stared. Calm they seemed, and used to human woes; Silent they heard her sorrow, with ears prepared. Now like a bird, flitting with anxious wings, Imprisoned within some vast cathedral's aisles, Hither and thither she flutters: to each she brings Her prayer, and is answered only with grave smiles. Indescribably troubled, &ldquo;Crush me,&rdquo; she cries, &ldquo;Speak, speak, or crush me!&rdquo; The lips are dumb.  She woke, no longer in shadow, the sun on her eyes, And sighed, and arose, and returned to her empty home.
On Seeing a Piece of Our Heavy Artillery Brought into Action Be slowly lifted up, thou long black arm, Great Gun towering towards Heaven, about to curse; Sway steep against them, and for years rehearse Huge imprecations like a blasting charm! Reach at that Arrogance which needs thy harm, And beat it down before its sins grow worse. Spend our resentment, cannon, yea, disburse Our gold in shapes of flame, our breaths in storm. Yet, for men's sakes whom thy vast malison Must wither innocent of enmity, Be not withdrawn, dark arm, thy spoilure done, Safe to the bosom of our prosperity. But when thy spell be cast complete and whole, May God curse thee, and cut thee from our soul!
Down in West Texas where the sun Shines like the evil one I had a woman And her name Was Joe. Pickin' cotton in the field Joe said I wonder how it would feel For us to pack up Our things And go? So we cranked up our old Ford And we started down the road Where we was goin' We didn't know  Nor which way. But West Texas where the sun Shines like the evil one Ain't no place For a colored Man to stay!
buy me an ounce and i'll sell you a pound. Turn gert (spin! helen)the slimmer the finger the thicker the thumb(it's whirl, girls) round and round early to better is wiser for worse. Give liz (take! tommy)we order a steak and they send us a pie(it's try, boys) mine is yours ask me the name of the moon in the man. Up sam (down! alice)a hole in the ocean will never be missed(it's in, girls) yours is mine either was deafer than neither was dumb. Skip fred (jump neddy)but under the wonder is over the why(it's now, boys) here we come
In late winter, when stone-colored trees steep longer in the tilting light not yet green as nuthard buds bundle-in unseen March red, orange and yellow, bunches brightly locked and swollen into nubs like toned Indian corn, not ripe, but ripening , I am drawn toward water. On the dock I walk while dust shakes from sun-loosened boards. No one comes while winter stuns the lake with rain. Fallen specks, locked on water, float indented into dimples such as needle-footed insects prick in stepping the taut water's skin. While the dust disappears, I bend and kneel, looking through the face surfaces juggle.
Damn it all, I have not forgot America  <> There was a song I heard in a smoker, Not found in a bookstall the book with broken hinges  Not Arnaut now, nor Cavalcanti. At Neuvic, in the blue Dordogne, A grotto, grey-green, the lighting by Da Vinci, Whither the old countess was moved from her bedchamber To ripple the silvery pool, bathing her ankle, <> Mine's the trick of a false beginning! A  In some nether quarter, Chicago or the Lehigh Valley  There's my setting, now for the phantastikon. Stalking with delicate tread amid the sparrows, Venus's sparrows, a house-drab, stabbed with jealousy, Seeks with a gun and a Winelout's connivance After her lover. &ldquo;He was my man, But he done me wrong&rdquo; so the stave hath't. <> Charles Baudelaire, hair green like a drowned man's, Sang in sonnet, loved in his life rather, A negress,  So this Johnnie who it seems was rich in kisses, <> Which through the solid sunlight, lustful, with golden Greaves and breastplates  To his fall an archangel. I crack my wit and close the canzone.
It comes to this: dwarf-throwing contests, dwarfs for centuries given away as gifts, and the dwarf-jokes at which we laugh in our big, proper bodies. And people so fat they can't scratch their toes, so fat you have to cut away whole sides of their homes to get them to the morgue. Don't we snicker, even as the paramedics work? And imagine the small political base of a fat dwarf. Nothing to stop us from slapping our knees, rolling on the floor. Let's apologize to all of them, Roberta said at the spirited dinner table. But by then we could hardly contain ourselves.
From afarda cometh Varda from the foreign boulevarda from the temple and bazaarda from the sights spectacularda cometh Varda cometh Yanko returning like a homing swanko from the famous Parthenonko to his watery backyarda in Sausalito's fair canarda cometh Varda cometh Yanko So give regarda with due ardor to eternally returning Varda our bright starda our blackguarda terror of the avant-garda hoisting with his own petarda his home brand of caviarda prodigal and paragonko he returns to carry onko as before and ever on so our phenomenonko Yanko
&lsquo;I would like to have been able to call myself a Victorian. Of such small vanities ... I think I am that vacuum-cleaner, And I sweep up gold-dust very precious. My ambition at the BBC this sounds like vanity But it has some truth in it  My organization put out vast masses Of simple biology, physics, geography, natural history  My ambition was to be able to talk To the producer of each specialism In his own language and on his own wavelength. Consequence was I met a lot of very surprising chaps: Attlee, Herbert Morrison, Crossman star turns  Sutherland, Michael Ayrton ... The best minds of the day walked into my parlour. Ronnie Knox very agreeable. &ldquo;Man is but a reed, but he is a thinking reed.&rdquo; That's Pascal. I have a natural desire To make myself more important and interesting Than I really am. Of course, of course. My ambition would have been to live a long life With no events in it, and grow a great beard. My aim now is to sit in a dressing-gown all day Thinking disciplined, high thoughts. I wish no part of the Contemporary Theatre.&rsquo;
Peace, the wild valley streaked with torrents, A hoopoe perched on his warm rock. Then why This tremor of the straw between my fingers? What should I fear? Have I not testimony In her own hand, signed with her own name That my love fell as lightning on her heart? These questions, bird, are not rhetorical. Watch how the straw twitches and leaps As though the earth quaked at a distance. Requited love; but better unrequited If this chance instrument gives warning Of cataclysmic anguish far away. Were she at ease, warmed by the thought of me, Would not my hand stay steady as this rock? Have I undone her by my vehemence?
That one is wan and transparently out of this world Does not make him less beautiful, less luminous, And that the other is terribly still and says nothing Does not make her reflection any less our own. In Bruges, on a March day in 1505, each glowing instant, Even this instant, is a chill breath away from death, Is clothed in bright array and hides an inmost thought. That is why the angel seems abstracted as he speaks; That is why the woman is beside herself, imagining. The clear bright blue that adorns the dead of winter Still floats above mountains painted in the distance, And the river remains frozen beneath delicate clouds. On a March day in Bruges, spring might come at any hour, But this angel will watch his words unravel into ages, And the woman must pause an eternity over her reply. It is a moment that might be lived forever, lingering Like second thoughts or a melancholy angel, like us  Look, the town beyond the bridge is one where we might live, With its medieval walls and maze of interwoven streets; See, there we are, among the crowd gathered in the square, In Bruges, in the bitter winter of 1505.
Ancient of Days, old friend, no one believes you'll come back. No one believes in his own life anymore. The moon, like a dead heart, cold and unstartable, hangs by a thread At the earth's edge, Unfaithful at last, splotching the ferns and the pink shrubs. In the other world, children undo the knots in their tally strings. They sing songs, and their fingers blear. And here, where the swan hums in his socket, where bloodroot And belladonna insist on our comforting, Where the fox in the canyon wall empties our hands, ecstatic for more, Like a bead of clear oil the Healer revolves through the night wind, Part eye, part tear, unwilling to recognize us.
Daedalus potters in the labyrinth. Self-generating walls. There's no escape. Except wings. And all round those Icaruses. Swarms of them. In the towns, in the plains, on the uplands. In the airport lounge (automatic goodbyes); at the space control centre (transistorised metempsychosis); on the sports ground (enrolment of pupils born 1970); in the museum (blond seepage of beards); on the ceiling (a rainbow stain of imagination); in the swamps (hooting of night, born 1640); in the stone (Pleistocene finger pointing upward). Time full of Icaruses, air full of Icaruses, spirit full of Icaruses. Ten billion Icaruses minus one. And that even before Daedalus invented those wings.
I will begin but how should I begin?  with hair, your hair, remembered hair, touched, smelt, lying silent there upon your head, beneath your arms, and then between your thighs a wonder of hair, secret in light and in darkness bare, suffering with joy kisses light as air. And I will close but is this fair?  with dawn and you reluctantly binding up your hair.
Climbing, tired, from the Green Line Station, she'd pass it on her way from work, the clinic where the demonstrators waved signs a doll in a noose, hung from a pole and spattered with red, photo blowups of fetuses, floating ghostly as a star map's mythic swirls. Their mood was unpredictable, polite on one day, cursing on the next. She couldn't tell why that afternoon was so different from the others. Hadn't she passed them each day for months? And hadn't she come to know their faces, the same for weeks on end? But somehow a man was shrieking at her, was claiming that she had just left the clinic. So now the crowd was chanting  around her shouting, one or two even jostling her shoulders. Then she felt it graze her temple a sharp, quick pain before the stone skipped across the cobblestones beyond, a clamor high-pitched, distinct, even among the traffic noise and taunts. At home she could just make out the bruise in the bathroom mirror, the tiny gash crescent-shaped against her temple. <> and from now on she would take another route home. When she woke that night and went to the kitchen to brew mint tea she at first didn't notice the rain merging with her profile in the window, the clicks on the roof and eaves as she bent toward her image, violated now, like those women she had read about in college, the watch dial painters, heads bowed as they dipped their brushes in the livid irradiated paint, tongues licking brush points for the detail work, the 6s and 8s, the arrows of the second hands.
There is no rest for the mind in a small house. It moves, looking for God with a mysterious eye fixed on the bed, into a cracked egg at breakfast, looking for glory in an arm chair, or simply noting the facts of life in a fly asleep upon the ceiling. The mind, sunk in quiet places, (like old heroes) sleeps no more but walks abroad in a slouch hat, quick with adultery at violent street corners, then trembling, returns, sadly directs its mysterious eye into a coffee cup there is no rest  for there are many miles to walk in the small house, traveling past the same chairs, the same tables, the same glassy portraits on the walls, flowing into darkness. There is no victory in the mind but desperate valor shattering the four walls, disintegrating human love until the iron-lidded mysterious eye (lowered carefully with the frail body under churchyard gardens) stares upward, luminous, inevitable, piercing solar magnitudes on a fine morning.
He puts the pieces of a thin shell that he broke in a ditch and walks on picking himself a bouquet that soon explodes in his hand. Heat moves beneath him. Above, ducks convulse and their blood dries as they fall on him like a dose of acid. Eyelashes of white whales sprinkle from an abandoned well that he stares down; Confederate suits shift in the cave where, again, he tries to stand still; but the ends of his fingers keep glowing and burning.
water is enough glassthere is room for more the Dutch a painting or, say, thousands wall on wall lightly held earth, the course of the day over remains a garden or what does the past become
<> And many men have cried against the breaking light. Only the words remain now, the few, the firagmentary; The men are gone: coldly, casually, desperately, They have stepped into the deep night. Only the words remain: Poe, Shelley, Whitman; The lame lover's and the other few: They are music now, are dustless: they do not die, But the men do. The rest is only a signing of proclamations, of treaties; A capturing and a releasing; a piling of stone on stone; A quickening, a dulling.... But the men have gone down alone. Only the words of the dead stand bright and glowing: These are all, all. The rest is only a loud wind blowing Down a long hall.
That man standing there, who is he? His path lost in the thicket, Behind him the bushes Lash back together, The grass rises again, The waste devours him. Oh, who will heal the sufferings Of the man whose balm turned poison? Who drank nothing But hatred of men from love's abundance? Once despised, now a despiser, He kills his own life, The precious secret. The self-seeker finds nothing. Oh Father of Love, If your psaltery holds one tone That his ear still might echo, Then quicken his heart! Open his eyes, shut off by clouds From the thousand fountains So near him, dying of thirst In his own desert.
After the sporty dolphin show you might wander down the dimmed aqua stairs into a darkness they have cut windows through, to see beyond the foggy glass all fishes swimming. It's not a glass bowl, but like the earth itself cut through, so that you are a traveler rising from the interior to this first glimpse at the teeming world. They circle slowly: sharks, jewfish, yellow fin; a stately manta pumps its black wings, soars toward the chopped surface, sinks into a turn, and disappears. It is some kind of lion-with-the-lamb business, all these varieties, cold killers and dumb swimmers, schoolers, the lonely blue-throated pilot fish, speckled distraught octopi jammed under rocks. You have come out of sunlight maybe, from the jaunty tricks of trained porpoises who ring bells and toss a ball and bark like crazy dogs, but down here where it smells like the seabed, and your schooling neighbors move shadily to grasp as that man does the sills of small rectangular portals, holding tightly as if onto the railing above a gorge, and the slab side of a grouper slides into view and you see the black incurious eye unblinking, and the next, and the light shafts down to strike the hard back of a channel bass, the cocked fin of a sawfish, you discover another version of privacy in this voyeur's den; like walking in on your father after the operation, where as the black monitor ticks its sad declarations you meet the gray dragged face, the gray hand groping at the broken dorsal of his sex, the gray, foolish smile he lifts and lets go in the dust-stirred, murky room that is like a tank you are both trapped in.
My mother grows smaller before my eyes, receding into the past tense slowly. It feels like an escalator down, she whispers, half asleep. I lean over the rail and there are vistas, whole histories spread out: my own father in a landscape where each blade of grass cuts like an eyelash caught in the eye, making a sharp edge between what is known and what is merely guessed. Is it her childhood or mine that glows with that light only pain remembered can throw? Fear is using up the oxygen. I must get used to the change in the air, how thin it grows and how strange it is that beauty can become the ache in the bone that proves you are alive. Now evening leaches the color from her face, and in the leftover light it is hard to see where the descent will end, hard to believe it is death holding her elbow with such care, guiding her all the way down.
Behind the shower-curtain thunder sharpens into light. The douche destroys the human figure and does its best to murder space. Everything that happens is the echo of something else, which merely deploys your shoulder and your breast. The white striations shimmer without contour exhaled in the relieved sigh of water. You dissolve in pools. The sun breaks on bare twigs in a winter truce between opposing powers of grey. Even as the body cools the room still breathes its freshness and the scent of soap continues to haunt the walls. Alone the body loses resolution, and feels at home in its abandonment. The lost flesh settles down against the bone with the lightness of a cushion. To feel complete and disparate at once is rarely possible. Think how the sun breaks down a house yet makes it glow in burning fragments or deconstructs a fence into mere rhythm. All the harmony is gone, but something leaps where shadows throw their careless and flat members. Your body is warm and slopes so gently. Hands have narrowed it to wrists and ankles, formed the bolder curvatures of your temple and your arm, explored your ears, lovingly parodied your brittle collarbone and shoulder. To snap out of the body, find it stiff or burned or crippled, to become objective as sun or water are, will not completely cancel out a world. And if it did there'd still remain the live arguments of the planet: the child in the pushchair; quiet empty places where the streets are full of dogshit; hats and shoes; grotesques met in an underpass; the delicate careful pity of faces in memory or mirror; the everyday news of bridges, trees and grass.
Be-Bop is precise clumsiness. Awkward lyricism under a feather's control. A world in a crack. Seen by ears. Von Freeman's tenor Apocalypses/beginning skies fussy about air and protective of trombones on Jacob's Ladder strung from basses in a corner of handclaps. Drums praying over evil done by trumpets and dances in fingertips. Be-Bop is elusive hammerlocks a piano accords crescendos in blue moanings. Lingers in beats marching across faces of sense. Harmonic nightmares obeying pianissimos of tones erupting from barks of Powell. Be-Bop is unexpected style punching music with garlic in tempo. Billie's pain and a cup of insinuations drunk by laughter before tears arise.
<>  Amid thy temples of a sanguine gem,  And warm, between thy garment's purple hem,  The languid passions of that Persian Queen Who sate with she-slaves in her quiet gloom,  And felt the sob of fountains and the keen  Perfume of lotus, and the murmurous lean  Of windy flowers, and life's impending doom. O dream of dazzled senses and the pain  Of conscious happiness! I woke beneath  The dark maturing dawn, while earth again Renewed its patient toil for human sake,  And felt the tender calm of such a death  As thine, O Wonder, dream whose death it was to wake.
All the world moved next to me strange I grew on my knees in hats and taffeta trusting the holy water to run like grief from a brownstone cradling. Blessing a fear of the anywhere face too pale to be family my eyes wore ribbons for Christ on the subway as weekly as holiness in Harlem. God knew no East no West no South no Skin nothing I learned like traditions of sin but later life began and strangely I survived His innocence without my own.
i want to clean the lover of the dead warrior take that strangeness out of her like a poisonous herb for my hands to remember. if you lived through the livers of warriors kneel near those ladies locked in their hearts, cut the chain between their knees. clean prayer, lord of thighs, make your body go past the black iron balls of the hero, past the half-eaten subway in the fork of his memory. the rats and the rain like an envelope. i kneel and i clean you, i put back the flame in your cunt out of my own. let's move to the rhythm of my body, over the lordly gold of the dead in the rain
The blank days are heaped up ahead of me, a sierra I have to cross in order to get there. Where? The marked days are a slag of words. In the course of crossing I must have upturned them. How? The days for crossing have a solid, permanent appearance  mountains of sandstone and sun between shadowy valleys of conifers. The days I have crossed? Every one of them misty rubble. A penline suggests there is hardness there. Or art. And this day I am crossing, crossing in sun and rain? Seems perfectly flat. The sun celebrates my defeat as I struggle towards it. The rain lays a wreath on each drop as it dies in its puddle.
&ldquo;This is as good as it gets,&rdquo; Bill would say, with a heartiness I envied. I thought, in fact, he was crazy a victim of positive thinking. And yet I was trapped in the negative. What he meant was his little house, his wife, his quiet corner for craftsmanship. He could make a poem of a wood shaving, hold it up to the light, alabaster! He is gone now after a life as good as it gets. Died eating pie. Lemon, fresh out of the oven. Served by his wife. A moment for the ages as quick and good as it gets. Months later I stand where the Romans stood  on the wall of a colossal arena  this one in Arles and I look out over the Rhone and the fields Van Gogh painted. I stand high amidst the babble of tourists. The Germans have perched their small boy on the parapet and I'm sure he will plunge to his death. His mother's finger hooks the kid's belt. I try not to show my concern  never quite free of my fears. The child will not fall. And I am not Christian enough even now to be dragged into the arena below, through the dark archways, or be kept in chains overnight, awaiting my turn to fight. Instead, we will have lunch at McDonalds on the main drag, under the plane trees, stone sober. And that will be as good as it gets.
I thi hovie an thi howd o sleep, whaur Dundee dovirs oan thi rink o ma frore-thocht lyk a Michael- angelo oan skates, inna sowff o faain, Eh gae back intae mains oan mains o gorse an Pict-banes whaur thi doozie-land's a roidit rist, and Sandy Hole Gaelic's pirn's unspoolan i thi prisk guschet o aa thocht's birth's biforrows, an therr, whaur garrons o thi speak ur growein back lyk a lizard's tail an aa'uts baists ur scarts an jenny- wullocks, an aathin's lyk pellack, thi peltin-pyock o aa &ldquo;feel&rdquo; osophy, Eh pense o naethin, lat naethin be, see thi mense o Scoatlan lyk Mozart's gartillin concerto, hiz piana spaldit assa smokie, and innuts paums a gaitherin o chestnuts lyk shut een.
Sect. Avert sect. Avert to wash bellies. Sect. Avert sect. Worship. Womanly Towns &amp; Towns. Tones. Witness. Witness &amp; Witness. Woman redeemed. Woman redeemed woman redeemed. Crutches. Crutches cockcrow. Crutches cockcrow Jews. Crutches impure. Crutches impure cockcrow. Crutches Jews. Drinking. Drinking in devil. Prayers. Prayerful. Messiah. First a holiday malice. Abyss. Ark bares Levi. Sabbath. Sabbatai Zevi. Sodom Sodom. Sodom Sodom. Marriage bed marriage bed. Brittle. Marriage breasts. Marriage breasts bristle. Match me. Onan. Again. Pederasty. In Three. Fatyesfatyesfatyesidol.Fatyesfatyesfatyesidol. Something is Presence. Holy Muhammed. Pass over. Pass over. Pass. Pass. Pass. Pass. Pass pass.(G. Stein) Pass water. Lilith a red head. Jest nudgingly. S &amp; Z &amp; S &amp; Z.S &amp; Z &amp; S &amp; Z.S &amp; Z &amp; S &amp; Z.Selah.
I have seen her a stealthily frail flower walking with its fellows in the death of light,against whose enormous curve of flesh exactly cubes of tiny fragrance try; i have watched certain petals rapidly wish in the corners of her youth;whom,fiercely shy and gently brutal,the prettiest wrath of blossoms dishevelling made a pale fracas upon the accurate moon.... Across the important gardens her body will come toward me with its hurting sexual smell of lilies....beyond night's silken immense swoon the moon is like a floating silver hell a song of adolescent ivory.
Under the wave it is altogether still, Alive and still, as nourishing as sleep, Down below conflict, beyond need or will, Where love flows on and yet is there to keep, As unconstrained as waves that lift and break And their bright foam neither to give nor take. Listen to the long rising curve and stress, Murmur of ocean that brings us the goddess. From deep she rises, poised upon her shell. Oh guiltless Aphrodite so long absent! The green waves part. There is no sound at all As she advances, tranquil and transparent, To lay on mortal flesh her sacred mantle. The wave recedes she is drawn back again Into the ocean where light leaves a stain.
It is hard sometimes to drag ourselves back to the love of morning after we've lain in the dark crying out O God, save us from the horror.... God has saved the world one more day even with its leaden burden of human evil; we wake to birdsong. And if sunlight's gossamer lifts in its net the weight of all that is solid, our hearts, too, are lifted, swung like laughing infants; but on gray mornings, all incident our own hunger, the dear tasks of continuance, the footsteps before us in the earth's belov&eacute;d dust, leading the way all, is hard to love again for we resent a summons that disregards our sloth, and this calls us, calls us.
While Ilion like a mist rose into towers Proserpine returned to her own fields, Where the white heifers lowed beneath a moon That shone like the bubbling foam about a keel When the prow sweeps into a midnight cove, And saw the great Achilles whom she knew Soaring up like an eagle with metal wings Toward battle, as if it were the sun, Toward a reality that would become Mere myth in a forgiving future's Unconcerned hands. What's there to believe in Really anyway, now that hours follow hours Like devotees circling a prayer wheel Gradually worn down to one gold kernel?
<> He treads the slow wake of his trench of stones, Tilting at ease the plowshare's single tusk, Rending the flesh of soil upon the bones Of rock; and all his musings run to wheat Threading a green-gold thatch along the brown Hill slope, and ill-timed rain, and autumn heat On shallow earth, and fences rotted down. And there is hunger in him that is bred Of feeding cattle in the reek of stalls, That dogs his feet, that follows him to bed To worn sheets and the little lust that palls On tepid flesh laid breathless in the gloom Where hot night quivers in the darkened room.
The wine they drink in Paradise They make in Haute Lorraine; God brought it burning from the sod To be a sign and signal rod That they that drink the blood of God Shall never thirst again. The wine they praise in Paradise They make in Ponterey, The purple wine of Paradise, But we have better at the price; It's wine they praise on Paradise, It's cider that they pray. The wine they want in Paradise They find in Plodder's End, The apple wine of Hereford, Of Hafod Hill and Hereford, Where woods went down to Hereford, And there I had a friend. The soft feet of the blessed go In the soft western vales, The road the silent saints accord, The road from heaven to Hereford, Where the apple wood of Hereford Goes all the way to Wales.
Blessed moon noon of night that through the dark bids Love stay  curious shapes awake to plague me Is day near shining girl? Yes day! the warm the radiant all fulfilling day.
The fields and &lsquo;the wooded escarpments&rsquo; Inherit the shades of old furniture  The dun and could-be-blood and lacks-conviction green Of sofas jammed up rear passageways In under-advertised hotels whose afterlife is spent Not being read about in waiting-rooms. The date is Nineteen Fifty-X. The residents Have died but not been told. They jostle bonily To hog the yellow  In steep decline from gin-and-it To after-dinner coma. Why detain them further? <> <> Deep in the retarded shires whose very Names have been abolished, they persist, Clandestinely, immortally defunct. Now if we took that other turning We should find them, arrayed in rank order Across the parterre, stripped now Of rivers and jungles, all rheumily glaring As though the prow of our canoe displayed A threatening announcement They could very nearly read. Though we go by a different route We can smell the old country a pillow On a yellow face, the endless nagging corridors Where damp and dust and gas contend. It lingers in the senile tearooms And in the crusty carpets of emporia Where what's for sale is sentimental horror, The used-to-be, the bad idea. We hear the silence in the churches wait For regiments disbanded on the Somme To swim back through the mud and give Due thanks, the ploughmen and the gentry With their proper limbs restored. Two Ridings later we come to the sea. On this neglected coast it rolls Indifferently ashore, a grey-white swell Unburdening itself, then sliding back Across the rotted boulder-clay And muttering  That should explain these haunted roads, Ancestral nowheres,
Did anyone tell you that in each subway train there is one special seat with a small hole in it and underneath the seat is a tank of piranha-fish which have not been fed for quite some time. The fish become agitated by the shoogling of the train and jump up through the seat. The resulting skeletons of unlucky passengers turn an honest penny for the transport executive, hanging far and wide in medical schools.
Listen, it's coming, the calm after the rain. To all the back yards of our alley, past the stadium, up to Druid Park, it's coming, the quieting down. The zinnias straining on strings tied to the iron pipe, give in. Accept to be leashed, held half-erect. The fig tree shudders, nods. Dell and Diane, from over the wire fence, have stolen the last few fruits. The rest are fallen, squashed. The boughs accept. And Mrs. Dunbar's laundry, drenched again, receives the small wind: T-shirts, dungarees, dishtowels motion casually from the line as if further comment were useless. Oak leaves lie on raggedy grass, on asphalt, lapped one over the other, hand-splayed, mingled, still. Finally quiet, they gleam in evening light, wet, dark salmon-tinted and Naples, yellow. Even the dogs have stopped their ruckus. Have gone indoors, shaking out droplets from fur, and last growls. And only trashcans now stand guard, erratically placed, at the gates of the wire fences, over the new peace that has settled down to inhabit the back yards with you not here to see them.
To come in touch with mysteries Of beauty idealizing Earth, Go seek the hills, grown green with trees, The old hills wise with death and birth. There you may hear the heart that beats In streams, where music has its source; And in wild rocks of mossed retreats Behold the silent soul of force. Above the love that emanates From human passion, and reflects The flesh, must be the love that waits On Nature, whose high call elects None to her secrets save the few Who hold that facts are far less real Than dreams, with which all facts indue Themselves approaching the ideal.
Oh, the wine of the rose is red! Oh, the wine of the rose is sweet! And the heart of the rose is love;  Love who sleeps at the poet's feet, In the dewtime. Oh, the breath of the rose is rare! Oh, the breath of the rose is fine! And the soul of its perfume comes Singing sweet to this heart of mine, In the dewtime. Oh, the night of the rose is here! Oh, the night of the rose is long! And the garden of my love is bright With the bloom of a passion song, In the dewtime. Oh, the wine of the rose is red! Oh, the wine of the rose is sweet! And the heart of the rose is Love; Love who sleeps at the maiden's feet, In the dewtime.
A fine night snow falls, filling the jade pond in a field where a cow sleeps on a wind. I enter the restless weather of my son's room and he is dreaming among changeless animal faces, feeling a fish we caught feel itself grow possessed and ravenous for his small hands. For fear, I lie down and put myself near him, like a hillside the light cannot climb, but the pond's pull goes on shaking him, his feet slipping a bank so he falls deeper and something swims in his heart. I touch him like a father breathing into the drowned and when he wakes there is snow in his eyes and a fish biting his feet under the blankets. In every child there is such a light and a dark changing the hidden texture of fields so a pike, frenzied on a hook, learns how to breathe snow and to run under a tree past translucent cows toward a room where a boy's dream or a girl's drifts, flows, and hovers under many fins, many hooves hanging like the accused and the dead. For them I will become the fisherman, the hunter. If in this life, child, I have been but a mouth numbed by sleep, lapping all light, all dark with the ease of fields and ponds changing shapes, now in your arms, in my arms I begin to feel a cloud of bones gather and flee in the night like a pike walking the stars for a lost pond. Dream as wild as you can for I am like the trees, a tall, shaggy roarer deflecting whoever comes in light where the fierce ones do not sleep but ride in the thump of your heart, and in mine, a father with three years of roots in silver mornings.
Stood there then among spears and kindled shields, praising Orion. Betelgeuse Aldebaran Abstract as future yesterdays the starlight crosses eons of meta-space to us. Algol Arcturus Almaak How shall the mind keep warm save at spectral fires how thrive but by the light of paradox? Altair Vega Polaris Maia Comes walking barefoot out of slavery ancestress childless mother following the stars her mind a star Pulsars, blue receding quasars their vibrant radio waves. Cosmic Ouija, what is the mathematics of your message? Stable stars, variable stars  hydrogen-into-helium fusions, radiations, spectral fires. And the Nine-Pointed Star, sun star in the constellation of the nuclear Will; fixed star whose radiance filtering down to us lights mind and spirit, signals future light.
The road edged down to a canyon that's been made an artificial lake, large enough for rowboats and canoes, with an island like a floating retina, scrub oak and cactus, a refuge for egrets and cranes. They made their heavy arcs on the water, coming to rest in skeletal branches. You stayed up late another night. Hours before dawn I left you sleeping and found on the island the bones of a crane, the vertebrae an abacus in sand. The delicate skull I put in my rucksack and remembered the journals of Audubon, who'd fill the hammerlock with powder, shoot his birds to draw them. Musket shot, the crane veers down like a child's kite, then a figure ill a birch canoe with chamois dries the feathers. On shore he draws it, imagining flight, shading majestic, lovingly detailed. I thought of our child who will not be born, yolk of color you carried and lost, just the eye of a crane, open and staring. I still can't distinguish refusal from loss. Once Audubon found the nest of the crane, fat chalky eggs buried in down, and opened the shell to draw the unborn bird, its pin-sized beak, wings already straining.
The train stops somewhere in the lit midlands, sun reflecting ... you know the kind of thing I mean. The lit midlands. Let me tell you some things about this poem. This poem happens on a train stopped in the midlands, and this poem also happens, if a poem can happen, in a gallery in Wales, where a man is looking at photographs. The two parts of this poem happen at once, quickly, like the snap of a successful christmas cracker. I am sorry; this poem was meant to move more quickly to the gallery in Wales from the lit midlands. It is stuck on the line somewhere between the midlands and Wales. Listen, you can hear the poem's engine running. It will start soon, it will lurch into life. Essential engineering works are holding the poem still; a man is standing before a photograph, and he is seeing only himself in the glass. Listen, hear the poem's engine running. Gaze at the photograph and wait, wait.
How can I help but admire the ever perseverant unquenchable dill that sways like an unruly crowd at a soccer match waving its lacy banners where garlic belongs or slyly invading a hill of Delicata squash  how can I help but admire such ardor? I seek it as bees the flower's core, hummingbirds the concocted sugar water that lures them to the feeder in the lilacs. I praise the springy mane of untamed tendrils asprawl on chicken wire that promise to bring forth peas to overflow a pillowcase. Some days I adore my coltish broccolis, the sketchbook beginnings of their green heads still encauled, incipient trees sprung from the Pleistocene. Some days the leeks, that Buckingham Palace patrol and the quarter-mile of beans  green, yellow, soy, lima, bush and pole  demand applause. As do dilatory parsnips, a ferny dell of tops regal as celery. Let me laud onion that erupts slim as a grass stem then spends the summer inventing its pungent tulip and the army of brussels sprouts extending its spoon-shaped leaves over dozens of armpits that conceal what are now merely thoughts, mere nubbins needing long ripening. But let me lament my root-maggot-raddled radishes my bony and bored red peppers that drop their lower leaves like dancehall strippers my cauliflowers that spit out thimblesize heads in the heat and take beetles to bed. O children, citizens, my wayward jungly dears you are all to be celebrated plucked, transplanted, tilled under, resurrected here  even the lowly despised purslane, chickweed, burdock, poke, wild poppies. For all of you, whether eaten or extirpated I plan to spend the rest of my life on my knees.
We are cut from the same tree not logs, scraps of wood or toothpicks but molded as sculptured future by rock cutters translating their art on to the roots of long life, baobab trees having endured the hurricanes, volcanoes and earthquakes of sprinting in America. Our lives have never been at peace. You have communities that love you. We do not say it often enough. With nourishment of millet and lentils you have been our tall structure an eloquent fire, sacred and on course. We now keep each other's scrapbooks and smiles.
Lying here quietly beside you, My cheek against your firm, quiet thighs, The calm music of Boccherini Washing over us in the quiet, As the sun leaves the housetops and goes Out over the Pacific, quiet  So quiet the sun moves beyond us, So quiet as the sun always goes, So quiet, our bodies, worn with the Times and the penances of love, our Brains curled, quiet in their shells, dormant, Our hearts slow, quiet, reliable In their interlocked rhythms, the pulse In your thigh caressing my cheek. Quiet.
now that fierce few flowers(stealthily) in the alive west begin requiescat this six feet of Breton big good body,which terminated in fists hair wood erect cursing hatless who (bent by wind)slammed hard- over the tiller;clattered forward skidding in outrageous sabots language trickling pried his black mouth with fat jibing lips, once upon a (that is over:and the sea heaving indolent colourless forgets)time Requiescat. carry carefully the blessed large silent him into nibbling final worms
When I am old I will not have you look apart From me, into the cold, Friend of my heart, Nor be sad in your remembrance Of the careless, mad-heart semblance That the wind hath blown away When I am old. When I am old And the white hot wonder-fire Unto the world seem cold, My soul's desire Know you then that all life's shower, The rain of the years, that hour Shall make blow for us one flower, Including all, when we are old. When I am old If you remember Any love save what is then Hearth light unto life's December Be your joy of past sweet chalices To know then naught but this &ldquo;How many wonders are less sweet Than love I bear to thee When I am old.&rdquo;
My friends, whose kindness doth their judgements blind, Know you (say they) the dangers where you run, Which zeal hides from you, but compassion Tells us? You feel the blow, the smart we find. I know it well, and as I call to mind This is the bill: dearness, affection, Friends, fortune, pleasure, fame, hope, life undone, Want, prison, torment, death, shame, what behind? Is then my sense transelemented to steel, That neither this, nor that, nor all can feel, Nor can it bend my mind, which their's doth break? Not so, nor so, for I am not insensate, But feel a double grief, that for Christ's sake I have no more to spend, nor have spent that.
From time one I've been reading slaughter, seeing the same bewildered face of a child staring at nothing beside his dead mother in Egypt, the pyramid blueprints approved, the phrases of national purpose streaming from the mouth of some automated sphynx. Day on day, the same photographed suffering, the bitterness, the opportune hate handed down from Xerxes to Nixon, a line strong as transatlantic cable and stale ideals. Killing's still in though glory is out of style. And what does it come to, this blood cold in the streets and a history book printed and bound with such cost-saving American methods, the names and dates are soon bones? Beware certain words: Enemy. Liberty. Freedom. Believe those sounds and you're aiming a bomb.
It is not good to feel old for time is heavy, time is heavy on a man's brain, thrusting him down, gasping into the earth, out of the way of the sun and the rain. Look at Isidore Lefkowitz, biting his nails, telling how he seduces Beautiful French Canadian Five and Ten Cent Store Girls, beautiful, by God, and how they cry and moan, wrapping their arms and legs around him when he leaves them saying: Good bye, good bye. He feels old when he tells these stories over and over, (how the Beautiful Five and Ten Cent Store Girls go crazy when he puts on his clothes and is gone), these old lies that maybe nobody at all believes. He feels old thinking how once he gave five dollars to a girl who made him feel like other men and wonders if she is still alive. If he were a millionaire, if he could spend five dollars now, he could show them how he was strong and handsome then, better than other men. But it is not good to feel old, time is too heavy, its gets a man tired, tired when he thinks how time wears him down and girls, milk-fed, white, vanish with glorious smiling millionaires in silver limousines.
As if gravity had brought him here, down through the matrix of the minor counties to the South West where the mainland dips its toe in the ocean. From the cliff, with the viewfinder, Robinson trained on a seal in the bay coming up like a spaceman. And in the guesthouse, Robinson giving a bogus address, not wanting the landlord's friends to visit his place, force the window casements, try on his wardrobe in the full-length mirror, load up with photographs and tapes or help themselves to a cooked breakfast. Robinson thinking this is ridiculous, Robinson. One word about the weather: uncertain. One sock in his coat pocket, that's odd, and for the upkeep of this private shore, Robinson slotting a hermit crab in the honesty-box. Time on his hands: Robinson at the beach, baking slowly like a loaf for hours, shaking down behind the windbreak, then all evening finding sand running out from unlikely places. The mark where his watch was  a good day's work, Robinson. As for St Michael's Mount he would rather die than pay the ferryman, and in the hour before high tide on the flooded causeway  Robinson ghost-like and up to his neck in it. Look, it is overwhelming; the air at St Ives so good he could take a slice and frame it, and this the town where the smell of fish once stopped a clock. Robinson not one for taking things lightly, not one for caution on those roller-coasting lanes over the coves and inlets. Robinson's radio good news on the weather front: sunshine mainly with bulletins of rain. At the stately home, his boots impounded for a pair of plastic overshoes, then warned for touching this and brushing that and nudging the other. Robinson to himself: unclean, unclean. Back at the room, Robinson damned if he'll pay an extra pound for a plug for the bath, soaking for an hour at least with his heel in the hole. Then without a towel drying off on the curtain. Typical, Robinson. Typical. Awake all night, a man in the next room coughing like a seal. Down on the shore the moon like a torch; whichever way he walks it finds him, follows him, will not flinch when he spins round to surprise it, and in that way reminds him.
O peerless marble marvel! what of grace, Or matchless symmetry is not enshrined In thy rare contours! Could we hope to find The regal dignity of that fair face In aught less beautiful? We would retrace, At sight of thee, our willing steps where wind The paths great Homer trod. Within whose mind Wast thou a dream, O Goddess? Nearer pace Brave Hector, reckless Paris, as we gaze; Then stately temples, fluted colonnades Rise in their sculptured beauty. Yes! 'tis Greece, With all the splendor of her lordliest days, That comes to haunt us: ere the glory fades Let Fancy bid the rapture never cease.
<> All day he's been in the world of fantasy, but now below the drenched allotment he is at home again. Through the walls of his burrow rain leaks, the tunnels turn liquid; his fur mud-soaked he screams his hatred of make-believe. All day he's been bunnying about  smiling benevolently with the toy shop dummies, wandering through the nursery all winsome and innocent. Now that above ground the children sleep cocooned in love for him something drops away and sweetness is no longer bearable. Soon enough those children will grow old. Brer Rabbit climbs into his shroud. He waits to haunt them.
My wandered brother wind wild bloweth now Driving his leaves upon a dust-smit air. September, &ldquo;proud-pied gold,&rdquo; that sang him fair With green and rose tint on the maple bough Sulks into dullard brown and doth endow The wood-way with an tapis rich and rare, And where King-Oak his panoply did wear The dawn doth show him but an shorne stave now. Me-seem'th the wood stood in its pageantry A castle galliarded to greet its queen That now doth bear itself but ruefully. A grief whereof I get no bastard teen Sith one there is doth bear the spring to me Despite the blast that blow'th the autumn keen.
The house was quiet and the world was calm. The reader became the book; and summer night Was like the conscious being of the book. The house was quiet and the world was calm. The words were spoken as if there was no book, Except that the reader leaned above the page, Wanted to lean, wanted much most to be The scholar to whom his book is true, to whom The summer night is like a perfection of thought. The house was quiet because it had to be. The quiet was part of the meaning, part of the mind: The access of perfection to the page. And the world was calm. The truth in a calm world, In which there is no other meaning, itself Is calm, itself is summer and night, itself Is the reader leaning late and reading there.
A single cemetery wipes out most of my people, skinny old slabs leaning this way and that as in stray winds, holding names: still, enough silver cathedrals fill this afternoon sky to house everyone ever lost from the light's returning.
Music composed during a war performed in occupation everything we are fighting for encoded in its arms air inhaled in the fetterless exhaled to fill the shelter when they got out of solitary for singing they sang the songs they had practiced there because the others were older they were sixteen a resuscitation like roses from the barbwire canals our mothers and fathers
the West pink Hammond's Castle da allure of smoke clouds German expressionism But where I look  the &lsquo;pond&rsquo; of Western Harbor, Stage Head a pure Tsukiyama-sansui, the water, at this hour, silver, and ochre, where it was once black, and gold: the wake of a boat peels off the ochre and runs silver over
Women poet and man poet Fell in love each with the other. It was unsafe for either To count on sunny weather, The body being no poet. Yet it had been the woman Who drew herself apart, Cushioned on her divan, And lent some bolder man Her body, not her heart. When seven long years were over How would their story end? No change of heart for either, Mere changes in the weather, A lover being no friend.
I spent a night turning in bed, my love was a feather, a flat sleeping thing. She was very white and quiet, and above us on the roof, there was another woman I also loved, had addressed myself to in a fit she returned. That encompasses it. But now I was lonely, I yelled, but what is that? Ugh, she said, beside me, she put her hand on my back, for which act I think to say this wrongly.
Wake up at six o'clock. We're out to sea. Nothing beyond that fence and slatted gate but a grey wave and plume-like shapes that could be flaws in the canvas or unmixed pigment in paint. Stones, blurred poppies, a wheelbarrow full of grass affirm a foreground. The world must exist out there. People must be getting up and getting washed, putting the kettle on, picking up a newspaper. Somewhere it must matter terribly not to be late, not to miss the limousine to the airport, not to be missed when the finance committee votes; when the training course commences, not be left out. But somewhere is hard to believe when it's not invented, when the world blindly refuses to admit detail. All that's required is pastoral: sheep among stunted rowans; for background, eroded &lsquo;Moelfre&lsquo; or &lsquo;bald hill&lsquo;. The thing's been done so many times. Imagine brushing the lichen's pale quartz over the rocks, now the shocking pink foxgloves, painting them in, old fashioned  What if today decides never to take off its veil, never to palliate art with a grand show of perspectives up the valley? More likely all we'll get is light's first lesson, an application of gesso, a whiteout of air sweet, soft, indestructible, the cloud of unknowing reluctant to create the known. Hills, stones, sheep, trees are, as yet, impossible. And when things are unmade, being also feels less alone.
I do not wish that anyone were here. This place is not a holiday resort with karaoke nights and pints of beer for drunken tourist types perish the thought. This is a peaceful place, untouched by man  not like your seaside-town-consumer-hell. I'm sleeping in a local farmer's van  it's great. There's not a guest house or hotel within a hundred miles. Nobody speaks English (apart from me and rest assured, I'm not your sun-and-sangria-two-weeks small-minded-package-philistine-abroad). When you're as multi-cultural as me, your friends become wine connoisseurs, not drunks. I'm not a British tourist in the sea; I am an anthropologist in trunks.
As the eggbeater spy in the sky flickered overhead, the TV  developed a facial tic Or as it turned out, the protesters had handcuffed them-  selves to the studio lights. Muffled off-camera, shouts of   talking head An arms cache came up, magazines laid out like a tray of  wedding rings. The bomb-disposal expert whose face was in shadow for  security reasons Had started very young by taking a torch apart at Christmas  to see what made it tick. Everything went dark. The killers escaped in a red Fiesta  according to sources. Talking, said the Bishop, is better than killing. Just before the  Weather The victim is his wedding photograph. He's been spattered  with confetti.
Emptying his bowel he sat in a small outside toilet among dustbins and fire escapes at the back of the new shops His turds were dry enough to rattle but no kind of trouble The shops were high on a shoulder built up from dumped ash and the view from the jakes door he held open and peered round dropped over the concrete walkway straight into the dip where there was a field of kale stinking and muddy Past that the double road went curving off below There was a row of leafless poplars and beyond them hoardings Across the scene the railway went out along a cutting bridge after bridge after bridge And clanking into space hoppers from the brickworks swung out over the road on a cable track down into the sidings Some way off on a hillside the Rehabilitation Centre had its lights on in the afternoon and over against the skyline under blue drops of early streetlamps a housing estate filled in the outlines of a farm Squatting up over the land backed by the betting and pie shops hearing the launderette it was cold with the door open but high
Ole King Cotton, Ole Man Cotton, Keeps us slavin' Till we'se dead an' rotten. Bosses us 'roun' In his ornery way, &ldquo;Cotton needs pickin'!&rdquo; De Hell he say.... Starves us wid bumper crops, Starves us wid po', Chains de lean wolf At our do'. Tiahed uh co'n pone, Pork an' greens, Fat back an' sorghum, An' dried up beans. Buy one rusty mule To git ahead  We stays in debt Until we'se dead; Ef flood don't git us It's de damn bo' weevil Crap grass in de drought, Or somp'n else evil; Ef we gits de bales When de hard luck's gone, Bill at de commissary Goes right on. Some planters goes broke, An' some gits well, But dey sits on deir bottoms Feelin' swell; An' us in de crap grass Catchin' hell. Cotton, cotton, All we know; Plant cotton, hoe it, Baig it to grow; What good it do to us Gawd only know!
Frowning over the riddle that Daniel told, Down through the mist-hung garden, below a feeble sun, The King of Persia walked: oh, the chilling cold! His mind was webbed with a grey shroud vapour-spun. Here for the pride of his soaring eagle heart, Here for his great hand searching the skies for food, Here for his courtship of Heaven's high stars he shall smart, Nebuchadnezzar shall fall, crawl, be subdued. Hot sun struck through the vapour, leaf-strewn mould Breathed sweet decay: old Earth called for her child. Mist drew off from his mind, Sun scattered gold, Warmth came and earthy motives fresh and wild. Down on his knees he sinks, the stiff-necked King, Stoops and kneels and grovels, chin to the mud. Out from his changed heart flutter on startled wing The fancy birds of his Pride, Honour, Kinglihood. He crawls, he grunts, he is beast-like, frogs and snails His diet, and grass, and water with hand for cup. He herds with brutes that have hooves and horns and tails, He roars in his anger, he scratches, he looks not up.
I saw through lacelike leaves in the lemony yellow morning, corroding the abandoned engines slowly sinking to the ground. There was a heap of rusty chains and iron sheets returning to the ore and in the shadowy car barn overalls with a yellow lamp was pounding on a spike <> the noises in small bubbles forth floating burst in the silent sunshine. Startlingly a rusty door fell down an inch on its rusty hinge an acetylene flash in the barn's black heart revealed a crouching welder with a hood.
I've lost place, coming here. The space's noises, trucks outside, cars shifting, voices I can't understand the words of how long ago all this was otherwise? Tired, time lost, the room's narrow size, patience to be here useless. All done long ago, all gone now. Cough's explicit continuity. Little birds twitter. The key has a big metal thing attached to it, flattened, then becoming a ball at one end, with a rubber washer around it. Six thirty now. <> <> Comb and ticket. Not me only without you  Oh so nice to be awake after no sleep all night. Last night, walking, the street was slabs of wild color, signs, so much to bring to mind. Things to sell, a long horizontal of store fronts, cars, radios, books, and food. Clothes people walking too. Absence makes the heart break a little bit wanting out. <> try it, all, over again ...&rdquo; Money's got stylized eagle on it and a cold looking man with bald head. I had to put on my glasses to make out its value while they waited. They live here, these people. <> <> Let us  <> and make love to
Though it leaks across a space not wide enough to turn its jagged bedload into loaves and eggs, its broken music into song, the course gets lost among the twigs and outcrops. The wind that rises out of bluff and bottomland, flaking and split- ting, will hunt the stream to this lean animal: by August it is glints and rustlings just the spoor of water to the bobcats that will pass along this barren crust. It pours through cracks into the dark and merges with the roar of buried currents. Little room for spreading skirts of silt. Little use to think of source or end or walk, as I have, among rootwads and thorns, to find the cur- rent dwindling in a clot of leaves  as if it could be held by touch or glittering turn of phrase.
It got beyond all orders an' it got beyond all 'ope;  It got to shammin' wounded an' retirin' from the 'alt. 'Ole companies was lookin' for the nearest road to slope   It were just a bloomin' knock-out an' our fault! Now there ain't no chorus 'ere to give,  Nor there ain't no band to play; An' I wish I was dead 'fore I done what I did,  Or seen what I seed that day! We was sick o' bein' punished, an' we let 'em know it, too;  An' a company-commander up an' 'it us with a sword, An' some one shouted &lsquo;'Ook it   An' we chucked our rifles from us O my Gawd! There was thirty dead an' wounded on the ground we wouldn't keep   No, there wasn't more than twenty when the front begun to go  But, Christ! along the line o' flight they cut us up like sheep,  An' that was all we gained by doin' so! I 'eard the knives be'ind me, but I dursn't face my man,  Nor I don't know where I went to, 'cause I didn't 'alt to see, Till I 'eard a beggar squealin' out for quarter as 'e ran,  An' I thought I knew the voice an' it was me! We was 'idin' under bedsteads more than 'arf a march away:  We was lyin' up like rabbits all about the country-side; An' the Major cursed 'is Maker 'cause 'e'd lived to see that day,  An' the Colonel broke 'is sword acrost, an' cried. We were rotten 'fore we started we was never disci  We made it out a favour if an order was obeyed. Yes, every little drummer 'ad 'is rights an' wrongs to mind,  So we had to pay for teachin' an' we paid! The papers 'id it 'andsome, but you know the Army knows;  We was put to groomin' camels till the regiments withdrew, An' they gave us each a medal for subduin' England's foes,  An' I 'ope you like my song because it's true!   An' there ain't no chorus 'ere to give,    Nor there ain't no band to play;   But I wish I was dead 'fore I done what I did,    Or seen what I seed that day!
Now the sky begins to turn upon its hub  the sun; each leaf revolves upon its stem; now the plague of watches and of clocks nicks away the day  ten thousand thousand steps tread upon the dawn; ten thousand wheels cross and criss-cross the day and leave their ruts across its brightness; the clocks drip in every room  our lives are leaking from the places, and the day's brightness dwindles into stars. If my days were like the ants, I might carry away this mountain; therefore, you must be precious to me, seconds; let them step and stamp upon you as they can, I shall escape with a few grains. The dark green leaves of grass, bushes, and trees  the jays are hushed, I see no squirrel scamper; but the street lamps along the winding path burn brightly  the work of man is not yet over. How pleasant the silence of a holiday to those who listen to the long dialogue of heart and clock.
Gaunt kept house with her child for the old man, Met at the train, dust-driven as the sink She came to, the child white as the alkali. To the West distant mountains, the Big Lake To the Northeast. Dead trees and almost dead In the front yard, the front door locked and nailed, A handpump in the sink. Outside, a land Of gophers, cottontails, and rattlesnakes, In good years of alfalfa, oats, and wheat. Root cellar, blacksmith shop, milk house, and barn, Granary, corral. An old  To thumb at night, the child coughing, the lamp smoked, The chores done. So he came to her one night, To the front room, now bedroom, and moved in. Nothing was said, nothing was ever said. And then the child died and she disappeared. This was Montana fifty years ago.
Thee God we praise for the short days of winter and the instant pause of the sun, concealed this morning in the unbroken cloud. It is raining gently on the northeast and we have brought a dripping Christmas tree in, and put the golden star on top as every other year  the golden star and oh the blue that Matty used to pin below to represent Albireo the double in Cygnus. There are few things as beautiful in your creation, Lord, as this thing that my son sought out with his telescope and used to pin on our treetop.
Climb, claim your shelf-room, far Packed from inquisitive moon And cold contagious stars. Lean out, but look no longer, No further, than to stir Night with extended finger. Now fill the box with light, Flood full the shining block, Masonry against night. Let window, curtain, blind Soft-sieve and sift and shred The impertinence of sound. Now draw the silence up, A blanket round your ears; Lay darkness close and sure, Inverted cup to cup On your acquiescent eyes: Dismissing body's last outposted spies.
All day they will not surface, shy Of sunlight and inquisitive hooks. For them, where you swim is the sky, Like vicious angels who'll later axe Their heads off and carefully watch them fry. These ponds occurred by royal decree To stuff up lords and margraves with The meat of fish that live unfree, Be-kingdomed, nationed, or in a bath. Their eyes look dead before they die; Whose days are spent uninterested, Huge golden lozenges hidden deep, Nudging through the pond's dark bed And algal gloom. Eat these and your lips Touch earth. You taste your stately mud. Mythologies start with a stomach, whether it Is filled with carp or the flesh of a son. But sit here, watch them rise at night, And land them wheezing under your palm  They're yours to say of what you might.
One recovering, with the scars down her back where her spine was straightened, scars on both hips, as if her flesh has been laced back like flaps or the wings of a butterfly  a woman rubs her with oils, back and shoulders, as if to rub away some invisible iron cape. When I started to feel myself again inside of my body, it was on and off, like flashes of black light. I had no idea where I went between, maybe up looking down through a small, narrow window: my body with its huge legs like the freakish legs of some huge bug, my swimming arms. Once, with the therapist, I felt something in me, reaching, a tendril of hope, and I remembered how, when my father beat me, when I'd be lying on the floor, begging, it was as if a fragile tendril reached out of my heart, that he might see: I was his daughter, his flesh, feeling. I looked up at my therapist and felt for the first time since childhood that trembling even more dangerous than fear.
We kent ut wiz yir accent that they couldna tak much mair o  thae engines foarmed somewhaur atween Belfast and Ontario. O Mister Scott, weel may ye talk aboot WARP Factor Seven: you tuke thi clash  transpoartit ut tae Heaven. But still we luve ye tho ye werr a Canuck in disguise: tho Spock an Banes baith fanciet Kirk you luved thi Enterprise. Noo that we aa could undirstaund fur ilka  oan engines see hoo Clydesiders still bigg  An syne  fae Argyle tae Arcturus; ye ootdrank Klingons grecht an smaa  anither trait no spurious. We kent dilithium crystals werr (tho in thir future foarm) thi semm gems that ye find gin  crack stanes aroond Cairngorm. An whit a bony fechtir, eh? Sae martial a revure,  while Kirk left you in oarbit fur three-quaartirs o an oor while he an Spock an Banes plunked aff  tae some furbidden planit  ye kent they werr oan lusty splores  but still ye birled  But maist o aa we luve ye coz ye saved oor naishun's fiss: ye nivir whinged aboot Englan but  ye beat thum intae Space!
Fugitive, wistful, Pausing at edge of her going, Autumn, the maiden, turns, Leans to the earth with ineffable Gesture. Ah, more than Spring's skies her skies shine Tender and frailer Bloom than plum-bloom or almond Lies on her hillsides, her fields, Misted, faint-flushing. Ah, lovelier Is her refusal than Yielding who pauses with grave Backward smiling, with light Unforgettable touch of Fingers withdrawn... Pauses, lo Vanishes.. fugitive, wistful...
Dusk is thy dawn; when Eve puts on her state  Of gold and purple in the marbled west, Thou comest forth like some embodied trait,  Or dim conceit, a lily-bud confessed; Or, of a rose, the visible wish; that, white, Goes softly messengering through the night,  Whom each expectant flower makes its guest. All day the primroses have thought of thee,  Their golden heads close-haremed from the heat; All day the mystic moonflowers silkenly  Veiled snowy faces, that no bee might greet Or butterfly that, weighed with pollen, passed;  Keeping Sultana-charms for thee, at last,  Their lord, who comest to salute each sweet. Cool-throated flowers that avoid the day's  Too fervid kisses; every bud that drinks The tipsy dew and to the starlight plays  Nocturnes of fragrance, thy wing'd shadow links In bonds of secret brotherhood and faith; O bearer of their order's shibboleth,  Like some pale symbol fluttering o'er these pinks. What dost thou whisper in the balsam's ear  That sets it blushing, or the hollyhock's,  A syllabled silence that no man may hear,   As dreamily upon its stem it rocks? What spell dost bear from listening plant to plant, Like some white witch, some ghostly ministrant,  Some spectre of some perished flower of phlox? O voyager of that universe which lies  Between the four walls of this garden fair,  Whose constellations are the fireflies  That wheel their instant courses everywhere,  'Mid fairy firmaments wherein one sees Mimic Bo&ouml;tes and the Pleiades,  Thou steerest like some fairy ship-of-air. Gnome-wrought of moonbeam-fluff and gossamer,  Silent as scent, perhaps thou chariotest Mab or King Oberon; or, haply, her  His queen, Titania, on some midnight quest.  Oh for the herb, the magic euphrasy, That should unmask thee to mine eyes, ah me!  And all that world at which my soul hath guessed!
The Golden Gallery lifts its aery crown O'er dome and pinnacle: there I leaned and gazed. Is this indeed my own familiar town, This busy dream? In distance large it lay, nor nothing broke Its mapped immensity. The stagnant smoke Hung coiling above dense roofs and steeples dim. The river, a serpent pale, my wandering eye Lightened; but houses pressed to his silver brim. With charging clouds the sky Broad shadows threw. A veil sweeps toward me; violent drops fall hard: Then softly the sun returns on chimney and tower, And the river flashes, barred With shadowy arches; warm the wet roofs shine, And the city is stricken with light from clouds aglow, Uplifting in dazzling line O'er valleys of ashy blue, their wrinkled snow. I leaned and gazed: but into my gazing eyes Entered a sharp desire, a strange distress. East I looked, where the foreign masts arise In rough sea-breathing reaches of broad access; And North to the hills, and South to the golden haze, But nowhere found satisfaction more. Beneath me, the populous ways Muttered; but idly vast their troubled roar Went up; I heard no longer: before me rose Pale as, at morning, mist from autumn streams, The longing of men made visible, helpless woes, Fountains of love wasted, and trampled dreams
This must be the anniversary of the day we woke to desert snow in October, a vast beige quiet on the land. And the woman on the foothill road who'd swerved her red MG into a ditch and now was weeping harshly enough to make her voice the landscape's center. You led her to the kitchen; I made coffee and phoned the wreckers who wouldn't drive up. Remember her face in the coffee steam of the heatless house? Too much talk about herself, marriages, and daughters who had turned away, facelifts and earlifts, embarrassing us all morning to attention.  <> <> a phrase my father used years and half a continent away. With valium and your electric blanket she slept all afternoon on the sofa while in the bedroom we made love so softly we could hear the melting snow above our breathing. What I remember best is how in sleep your hands would gesture to your dreams until your dreams talked back and laid them folded delicate birds pulsing on your breasts. We woke to find her gone, a twenty dollar bill on the kitchen table. Roads too slick, we turned back home without the restaurant dinner it would buy. Soup and tea for supper, and Monday wreckers towed the red MG away. I used the money for a California Chardonnay, though the year was wrong, the taste a little indistinct, and you pronounced it <> tracing my forehead in the lamplight.
Years of seeing things. It was much too long before I stopped believing in them: poor eyesight, young parents. The answer lay in the senses. <> <> The world sprang into focus street lamps ballooned and balanced sunlight glittered on the Bendix each cloud was cut to perfection. Years of hearing things. I must have been seven before I stopped counting them and then there was a teacher's note from school: <> They should have looked behind the sofa where I'd be cuddling antlers of Stag's Head Sumac, snapped from the tree, its white sap dripping down my cardi. I lay on my father's chest while he poured warm oil and stopped my ears with cotton wool, my antlers became antennae my ear was laid to the ground of the prairie. He turned me into a diviner, seventy times seven was my answer. Missing things was no problem. I bisected the lines of sight and hearing and made my nest in the classroom just out of sight, just out of hearing, where the teacher echoed with colour like a soft-lipped moose in a meadow stirring its bulk, which I knew was lighter than a flower.
The astonishing races the Australians ran at Santry, and everywhere this summer their swimmers swamped ours in wakes of water; their batters beat us. How glad and proud must Melbourne be! We loudly wonder as if they wended from another world where gravity is less and very slowly tick four minutes to the mile, those mighty kangaroos and jolly wallabies. When I was young we couldn't run so fast, nor did we whip moons like tops around. We hardly could fly. Aren't these new men lovely! God grant them prudence to their prowess equal! My part it is to decorate their glory.
Into my empty head there come a cotton beach, a dock wherefrom I set out, oily and nude through mist, in chilly solitude. There was no line, no roof or floor to tell the water from the air. Night fog thick as terry cloth closed me in its fuzzy growth. I hung my bathrobe on two pegs. I took the lake between my legs. Invaded and invader, I went overhand on that flat sky. Fish twitched beneath me, quick and tame. In their green zone they sang my name and in the rhythm of the swim I hummed a two-four-time slow hymn. I hummed &ldquo;Abide With Me.&rdquo; The beat rose in the fine thrash of my feet, rose in the bubbles I put out slantwise, trailing through my mouth. My bones drank water; water fell through all my doors. I was the well that fed the lake that met my sea in which I sang &ldquo;Abide With Me.&rdquo;
More marrow to suck, more elegies to whistle through the digestive track. So help me God to another dollop of death, come on strong with the gravy and black-eyed peas, slop it all in the transcendental stew whose vapors rise and shine in the nostrils of heaven. Distill the belches, preserve the drool as ink: Death, since you nourish me, I'll flatter you inordinately. Consumers both, with claws cocked and molars prompt at the fresh-dug grave, reaper and elegist, we collaborate and batten in this strictest of intimacies, my throat an open sepulchre, my tongue forever groping grief forever young.
a person drops down on a wire depending from the sky he can't secrete a filament like a spider but he can hear a jungle telegraph without a wire on a sony he can hang on to the guy rope of a conditional existence on a peninsula that creeps out into the cold steam of an archipelago but he can't climb back up because the tensile strength of the platinum remains less than the hydro dynamic power of the falls
First there was putting hot-water bottles to it,  Then there was seeing what an osteopath could do, Then trying drugs to coax the thing and woo it,  Then came the time when he knew that he was through. Now in his hospital bed I see him lying  Limp on the pillows like a cast-off Teddy bear. Is he too ill to know that he is dying?  And, if he does know, does he really care? Grey looks the ward with November's overcasting  But his large eyes seem to see beyond the day; Speech becomes sacred near silence everlasting  Oh if I  In the past weeks we had talked about Variety,  Vesta Victoria, Lew Lake and Wilkie Bard, Horse-buses, hansoms, crimes in High Society   Although we knew his death was near, we fought against it hard. Now from his remoteness in a stillness unaccountable  He drags himself to earth again to say good-bye to me  His final generosity when almost insurmountable  The barriers and mountains he has crossed again must be.
<> <> those choruses, their clamor. Dawn ridge over not where I traveled but to the mind-meant labyrinths of beast desire to be more so. He does not tell us she was beautiful. That typecasting of Eros he suspends. Lifts up that vernicle &amp; then we cry, marred by her evil smell. It is the same woman seen again with lust, &amp; then with lust lifted away  it costs a kingdom to see her pure again. It is not to be beastly to touch her though the  degrades the wanter who could so light reach out his thinking to be with her. Bad dog. To want to &amp; not do. So that the want becomes a template that denies her, hides her. The bad dog peers through, howls at her pale moon.
The three-fold terror of love; a fallen flare Through the hollow of an ear; Wings beating about the room; The terror of all terrors that I bore The Heavens in my womb. Had I not found content among the shows Every common woman knows, Chimney corner, garden walk, Or rocky cistern where we tread the clothes And gather all the talk? What is this flesh I purchased with my pains, This fallen star my milk sustains, This love that makes my heart's blood stop Or strikes a sudden chill into my bones And bids my hair stand up?
He invited me to dinner at Leonardo's. I hurried to get ready: putting on the gray blouse, the orange one, seeing which looked better; trying to find my comb; and the lily-of-the-valley perfume; and the magenta-enameled costume bracelets. I would order schnitzel. And we'd talk about Venice, where he'd spent some time. Usually I was pleased with everything about him  as when he played  and selections from  Or when we browsed through the Sea Coal, a shop on Lee Street, touching the crystal fish and birds that glistened under lights; listening to the voice of Billie Holiday on the record player, Her voice like a dry leaf, singing &ldquo;Yesterdays.&rdquo; Usually I was pleased. But then I would think, &ldquo;What if he's ordinary and I don't know it? What if I find it out later when he starts repeating himself, saying the same things over and over? Will I notice? I don't notice now.&rdquo; And I didn't when we followed paths into the park, to places of spring shadows and lamplight with the lake behind us, silent, breathing, large as a sea... and city windows before us, shining through the trees. He wore a long black overcoat and played violin in a traveling baroque ensemble.
Spur-scattered and burrowing a surge of sand:  blue and orange down the ride of her, tilted to hear the smashed breathing of aeons,  so too the dazed may still live, a painted fan spun to the dancing floor  among the blind heels clatter-ribbed and melting bolts oozing oxide of blood:  so rummaging love tapers them,  oh how the adze caressed you, lightest curve still healing to the hand  and the mathematical plunge outward into the Punic element,  caressed and raftered each city, and in the Greek horse also it framed up breathing beams, men itched and sweated inside her,  outside they chanted hymns, and now the tarred joinery of the mortises  lies unburdened, in the gape and roll of your undoing  resin remembers the iron.
I do not want to write poetry like yours but still I love the way you do it. Something comes Through and through, I hear the music of it, I hear the meaning too. I feel the flesh Of the poem Firm And the bone hard. It comes to me Beloved poem, I love it And then I let it go.
Alone with Orion a lesson, the woman said, in drawing a straight line  I'm home. This is what I fought for, to draw from the darkness as from a well. I endured, she said, without the gift of faith and made what I needed out of work and love and stolen time. I kept at the writing, and refused the sacred bowl of broth  dressed-up Sundays, china never used, but weekly dusted. In this, our city, a woman might find good quality of night. In our spidery house where ghosts sit weeping in front of mirrors, Orion might bend and hearts love more fiercely. Our prayer would read: give us this day our daily darkness, deliver us not from temptation.
<> Thinks the hero is the main character, The heroine Thinks the heroine is the main character, The audience is enthralled but Has not much say in the matter. For the main character is still out in the wings, He has not yet appeared. Appalling crimes are committed, Appalling sorrows crawl across the stage and fall Into the laps of the audience. Ambitions are proven absurd, Times are slaughtered, Great speeches are made and revoked, The stage is set for a Major Revelation and still The main character sits in the wings, Twiddling his thumbs. For no one has told him exactly what it is he must do To bring the play to a fruitful conclusion. And so it goes on and on and on, And appalling crimes are committed, And great speeches are made and revoked, And still the main character (Who was specially chosen for the part) Sits exhausted in the wings, Twiddling his thumbs.
The time comes when the leaf must fall, No wind but from the sycamore. I see and faintly hear five more. A larch at hand stands like a tall Girl green skirts wide as if to make A curtsy: beech-leaves corn-flake Crisp; the birch tree leaves are all Like small gold coins; floating on the tarn Sodden to brown towards the greedy fall. Unfallen rowan berries seem Ruffled in their mirror dream. Across the water's breadth the sprawl Of death's brown bracken. Unfurled Oakroots twist, wide, grasping, snarled, And far the canvas-tearing call Of rooks, small chirrups near. Stones Avoid black mud, risk broken bones: Slippy downhill and uphill haul. Sit by cracked pallid bark and gaup; Thick moss below, pale lichen up. Upthrusting rock a trap and wall. Over a bridge, field path, bullocks. Reach Finsthwaite's one long street: relax. We cannot always catch the ball But our opponent throws it high, High up still still, piled clouded sky. The day comes when the leaf must fall.
along walls reached you figure things the solid the group life span the world where energy goes out binds displaced settling near and far develop touch the wide awake
Before train-time they swept across the track Bare-headed or beretted, in a tide Bearing loaves Of  And Chambertin. The engine nudged a furrow Across their crest and chuffled to a stop. They thrust the loaves and bottles Of the best they had to give toward open windows Where, bleared and grizzled, the late triumphant hosts Of Budapest Outstretched their hands in pauperage and pain And pride.  <> With French enough replied &lsquo;Merci&rsquo; for Dijon's gifts of gratitude, Of homage to their hopeless hope, of guilt That others died, That others fought and fled, their future left Behind, that boy propped on a hard-backed bench, A swollen bullet in his throbbing arm, While we communed with  <> Whooshed and strained. The stock began to roll Toward the mountains: A disused camp for Prisoners of War Would roof them in while squat Red tanks patrol All homeward roads past Austria. Then peace Settled from grimy skies As a wild gull, daubed in coaltar, flounders Disconsolately down to a joyless rock. In bitter weather We heard that some escaped Hungarians, One with a sling, from Dole toiled up the Juras Toward the immaculate freedom of that zone That looms in Alpine snow.
<> In that vast snow-land, shout the passionate tale; Touch graybeards in the mart, bid braggarts quail, And rouse the student lone from his old phlegm To breathe the self-same sacred air with them, Spirits supreme, our brothers! whose avail Is sacrifice. Nay, make no woman's wail: Rome is re-born! whom kings dare not contemn. On Neva's shore-streets tho' high blood be spent, There this lorn world's renascent hopes are meeting: In camp is Mucius, at the bridge, Horatius; Regulus walks in gyves, magnificent; And thence men hear O sound sublime and gracious! The unquelled heart of C&aelig;sar's Brutus beating.
Poe is dead, our sweet flower. The war goes badly, but when was it ever other? Men slash and shoot, the streets cloy with shadows. We ladies keep the lamps, we sing while ice glows yellow as fever in the tramps. When was it ever other? Brown auntie is old, will dance no tunes for my lover. Our century gone, what chance in the field of desire? Black Baudelaire writes, in France.
Play with a few decades, shift them: try to imagine Ruskin in the New World, walking with John Muir in the wilderness. He, whose enraptured first sight of the Alps transformed him, that meek Protestant Sunday when he and Mama and Papa and dull cousin Mary were patiently waiting the secular week's beginning before attempting the sights, but all unawares came face to face with the sublime unmistakeably not clouds, surpassing all that engravings had promised, floating west of Schaffhausen, sharp,  <>  changed him from docile prig (poor child: he was 14 and knew so much and so little) to a man of passion, whatever his failings. Imagine him in Yosemite. Would loyalties already divided  Rock Simple or Rock Wrought, strata of mountains, strata of human craft, tools of Geology or tools of Art have split him? Would wilderness, legends unknown, or if known offering no toe-hold for his mind's expectant footing, have swept him wholly into its torrents of non-human grandeur? Or wouldn't Art have pulled him back in the end to layered history felt in the bones, (even Geology a fraction of that insistence, loved for its poetry of form, color, textures, not as a scientist loves it)? Back to where human hands created <> <> <> <> <> Back to where Nature even the Alps, still so remote, unsung through so many centuries  lay in the net or nest of perception, seen then re-seen, recognized, wrought in myth.
Wide-walled it stands in heathen lands Beside a mystic sea, Its streets strange-trod of many a god And templed blasphemy. Far through the night, with light on light, It flames beside the sea; While overhead an unseen dread Impends eternally. There is a sound above, around, Of music by the sea; And weird and wide the torches glide Of pagan revelry. There is a noise as of a voice That calls beneath the sea; And all the deep heaves, as in sleep, With vague expectancy. Then slowly up as in a cup Seethes poison swells the sea; As through black glass, wild mass on mass, The town glows fiery. Red-lit it glowers, like Hell's dark towers, Closed in the iron sea; And monster forms in awful swarms Wing round it cloudily. Still overhead the unseen dread, Whose shadow dyes the sea, At wrath-winged wait behind its gate Till God shall set it free. An earthquake crash; a taloned flash  And, lo! from sky to sea A sworded Doom that stalks the gloom, Crowned with Death's agony. And where it burned, a flame inurned, Blood-red within the sea, The phantasm of the dread above Sits in immensity.
My soul is robbed by your most treacherous eyes Treading its intricate infinities. Some pale light hidden in light and felt to stir In listening pulse, an audible wonder Delighting me with my immortal loss; While you stay in its place, rich robbers, that is  dross. Wine of the Almighty who got drunk with thee. (The reason sin God slumbering then flew  free.) Alas! if God thus, what will hap to me? Ah! even now drunken while your sweet light  beams, You, far as Heaven, I am drunk on my dreams. Not yet, that glance engendered ecstasy, That subtle, unspaced, mutual intimacy, Whereby two spirits of one thought commune, Like separate instruments that play one tune. The music of my playing is lost in thine. Does the sun see when noonday torches shine? Mine is not yours though you have stolen mine. Beautiful thieves, I cannot captive ye, Being so bound even as ye rifle me. My limbs that moved in trembling innocence You harden to knowledge of experience Till honour rings upon the ear as crime.
I'm not as unprepared as you might think. Take a look outside my window.  All day they wait like soldiers for my voice, a voice so beautiful that everyone  no, not so beautiful, a voice so clear  that everyone who hears it, dogs included, will leave the hospital, without a fuss, some with chocolates, some with fish, or fruit, and make their way into the distant mountains. And if they want to dress in dresses, let them. Let them wear the shiniest materials the nurses and the clergy can provide, so when they reach their final destination the rocks will sparkle with them for one year. Then men will come, attracted by the light, and, armed with flames, expertly incinerate them; returning with the ash to the valley, where things have changed, and even dogs are burnt, and palm trees' desiccated leaves go clacketty, in at the hospital windows,
Thine was a brain of Nature's finest mould, Great Sumner! and thy spirit-poise as rare. Born not to idly dream but nobly dare  With all the mind's vast forces well controlled, Thou, like Olympian Jove, didst wisely hold Stern empire over justice. Thine the care, That right should rule, and wrong, however fair In outward seeming, should be shunned. Untold The influence of thy magnanimity. Alert in action, sage in counsel thou, A statesman truly, not alone in name, Thy regnant soul spurned ev'ry false decree. Honor was graven on thy shield, and now We fain would honor thee with loud acclaim.
Only a Dodger fan would clout you with a bottle made for drinkin out, don't be a barbarian, stow your liquor without makin a row. A quiet place with television ain't the place for a panzer division, so quiet down you fuckin fools an' keep your asses on your stools. If you want to drink with us wipe that growl off your puss. Let Joe Massouli tell us what's the score, for who's he got the hots? No soap? O.K. by me. No soap. Next round, Harry, pass me up. Whaddye bashful? sure she's nice, you're a clean kid without no lice. Oh, you don' wanna others to hear? whisper it, tell me in my ear.  Holy smokes! so that's her name, you're a dead cookie, what a shame! a nice Catholic boy like you! Mother o God, the things we do! Sonny, you oughta have your brains picked by one o them psychiatrix.
Wanting my Birth Certificate and not finding it handy, I called at the Registry Office for proof that I'd been born, And the clerk unclasped a volume and pushed it across the table: &lsquo;Perhaps you'd like to look at your father's signature?&rsquo; Two entries on each page name, date and parents, And the Registrar's endorsement: &lsquo;Henry Frankland Fox&rsquo;  Whose grand-daughter, now my doctor, will maybe one day Endorse my Death Certificate and clasp up the book with a clang. Familiar beyond all question, yet not what I'd expected, A recognized unrecognition faded bluely on the page: Not a father's and yet a father's, a name that perplexed and  perturbed me, Faces and loyalties emerging blurred from a boy's dead world. It was the hand of James Sharpe, Bachelor of Science,  Headmaster, Flourished on each term's report from my twelfth to my  seventeenth year  Notifying there, in that last, still almost Edwardian winter, A daughter's birth a few days before or after mine. Two strict sergeants of my boyhood, guides, guardians, reprimanders, One loved but not respected, one respected but not loved  I held their parade-grounds apart, kept one ear for each one's  instructions, And their annual Speech Day meeting wrapped embarrassment  round the Prize. As I stand in my father's old shop, among books he could not  have unpuzzled, And the hundred yards to the school lead a million miles away, As the town my mind still lives in crumbles dustily around me  Joseph Nicholson, James Sharpe, which one am I accountable to?
This is the final resting place of engines, farm equipment and that rare, never more than occasional man. Population: 17. Altitude: unknown. For no good reason you can guess, the woman in the local store is kind. Old steam trains have been rusting here so long, you feel the urge to oil them, to lay new track, to start the west again. The Jefferson drifts by in no great hurry on its way to wed the Madison, to be a tributary of the ultimately dirty brown Missouri. This town supports your need to run alone. What if you'd lived here young, gone full of fear to that stark brick school, the cruel teacher supported by your guardian? Think well of the day you ran away to Whitehall. Think evil of the cop who found you starving and returned you, siren open, to the house you cannot find today. You question everyone you see. The answer comes back wrong. There was no house. They never heard your name. When you leave here, leave in a flashy car and wave goodbye. You are a stranger every day. Let the engines and the farm equipment die, and know that rivers end and never end, lose and never lose their famous names. What if your first girl ended certain she was animal, barking at the aides and licking floors? You know you have no answers. The empty school burns red in heavy snow.
Ganging the men, he warms himself At the furnace of their breath. Cynically, they eye his youth, holding Their knuckles against frost's white razors, Before demurring, finally setting to. Turned twenty now with wife and infant son, Already second foreman in the yard, Paul moves through the swarf with slovenly grace Or stands surveying a stark inheritance. Flicking an eye over the electric shears  Poised like a vulture on a carcass of rust  He interprets for me the thick Irish Of the tatter-men, their larded hair Bluer than jackdaw wings, as they drive Through a landscape he has sculpted from steel. Later, in the washroom, he is moved to speak. I see his narrow profile, the skin Drawn smooth as paper on his jaw, The sour-milk complexion of winter, And listen to the hard, clean syllable Of the sexual act punctuate his drift Of careful words as another man might Inhale a cigarette. A single sucked breath That fascinates with its regularity. To each fierce platitude I respond: Our hands are bright with the green paste Meant to dissolve oil. Anointed thus, We may approach each other formally, Two strangers who have found themselves Suddenly vulnerable. We share This experience through the hot water, Our words clinging to air like steam's grey net, Knowing outside lies the safety of routine Where our smiles will slew if eyes collide, But only for the sake of ritual. In the south, adding clangour to the sea's Deep bass has spread an iron field. I watch Paul slowly pick his way Through that man-scavenged territory, Establishing a claim with his eyes. Loud gulls rise up on wide hinged feet, The filth floats on the narrow sea, But one remains behind while we depart: A boy who chains the gate against the night, Makes fast the ingots of his chosen trade: Who flourishes where I feel myself fail.
Where is Callas la Divina with her black velvet and her white passion? Where are the women and women and women she threw into life for an hour from her throat to float and fight? She cannot hear the last bravo. <> Where is Nabokov with his butterfly-net, his galoshes, his mushrooms, his index-cards? He has gone in a whiff of bilberries and blinis, his fire has paled, his puns have flunked. Shades crowd the lakeside hydrangeas and swallows skim quick and low. <> Where is Bolan, the elfin, now? Who has taken his spangles and songs, bongos and gongs, and his white swan? Who has pied-piper'd the pied piper into that childless, teenless wood? The metal shadow, <> Where is Presley all in silver, with his sideburns and his quiver of simple rock, and what is that army he's uniformed for, in a white sheet, will the slowstep motorcade battalion never let him go? <> And where is Lowell that sweet mad poet with his rumpled suit and uranium finger? A giant forsythia covers the Pentagon with better than gold, but the magnolias wax the Potomac white with grief  in words at least. Be true, be brief: we lack his fellow. <>
Fair Hope with lucent light in her glad eyes, Fleet as Diana, through the meadow speeds; Nor dewy rose nor asphodel she heeds, For lo! unwonted radiance in the skies Bids her not pause. The silv'ry shimmer lies 'Mid blooming vistas, whence the pathway leads To heights aerial. The glow recedes As panting Hope toils on, while awed surprise Fills her sweet glances; will the vision fade Ere she can reach it? Nay, 'tis lovelier far, Rarer perspectives open to her gaze; Then hasten on, expectantly, glad maid! The splendor still will tremble there afar; Yet count this quest the holiest of thy days.
Who are you, listening to me, who are you listening to yourself? Are you white or black or does that have anything to do with it? Can you pop your fingers to no music, except those wild monkies go on in your head, can you jerk, to no melody, except finger poppers get it together when you turn from starchecking to checking yourself. How do you sound, your words, are they yours? The ghost you see in the mirror, is it really you, can you swear you are not an imitation greyboy, can you look right next to you in that chair, and swear, that the sister you have your hand on is not really so full of Elizabeth Taylor, Richard Burton is coming out of her ears. You may even have to be Richard with a white shirt and face, and four million negroes think you cute, you may have to be Elizabeth Taylor, old lady, if you want to sit up in your crazy spot dreaming about dresses, and the sway of certain porters' hips. Check yourself, learn who it is speaking, when you make some ultrasophisticated point, check yourself, when you find yourself gesturing like Steve McQueen, check it out, ask in your black heart who it is you are, and is that image black or white, you might be surprised right out the window, whistling dixie on the way in.
<> my father used to sing. We drink from her glasses, and I know you're thinking as we sip that she touched them with her hands and lips. Grief is diamond hard. It engraves the story on glass, leaves nothing out. Sunlight swims on this page, this table, in the tumbler of water like a shoal of moving shallows, not quite shadows, or smoke, as the glass hardens and clears. We fill our goblets with water, cold pure risings from deep beneath our garden. Each glassful is archaeology, brimmed seepings that have taken life-times to collect. Into her crystal sherry glasses pour us a  into fine Venetian crystal. With this libation I remember her, hold it to the light, touch your glass with mine on a pure note.
The mist of the sky's mouth hovered over the roof of the Louvre; an old painter on spindly legs walked her patient mongrel to the Seine; the banner of the Dubuffet exhibit draped the long perspective of shutters from old houses kneeling on mended knees; flat boats lay tied to the banks, black and square in lacquered quiet; the &Icirc;le de la Cit&eacute; shot its cheeks out broad and determined, the original mother in stone; I gazed in the eyes of the window for keys to the rapid turning of this tongue that coats the teeth, that seduces with chocolate and cheese; I looked at the dumb point of my pen, angered by its impotence and my starved wish to bring you the hurried frames of a city whose life was flashing in my hand, filling the stations of empty dreams.
What is it that your absences have nursed in me? What &lsquo;quiet grove&rsquo;? What &lsquo;dreamy view&rsquo;? No odyssey perfects those scenes of you I ramble in, rehearsed and re-rehearsed. No information bureau better-versed in catalogue, no lace whose markers grew in shocks of spider-margarita dew  can map my moods' terrain, her pocks of thirst. And only habit, yours. I wonder if, late at night, the cricket over, a criss- cross rain outside is drumming while you snooze; and wake to closing scores to find its riff reminds you, not of deadlines you may miss, but songlines more insistent than the blues'.
All around us, the cocktail party in its elaborate rituals: thin, nervous waiters parade in slightly frayed tuxedos offering drinks or tiny meatballs from metallic trays to guests who laugh as they scan the crowd, and we stand talking about your child when suddenly, your wine tilts wildly, your body slams into mine, and I hug you without thinking as your husband steps forward so that we hold you between us like bookends, pushing, and though I don't know what is wrong, I push, push it back, whatever forces through you, something mindless, violent, a thrilling energy humming through you, through me too. Your husband looks right and left and right at the crowd around us in its disturbed sea of sequins and laughter and smoke; only then do I see your eyes wide but dead, the snarling set to your lips, your head hard to one side. And though my blouse is wet, I say to him,  letting the fine strands fall between my open fingers, and I say to you,  to push it back, hold you erect so no one will know. He tries to take your empty glass, but you won't let him, he tries to pry the fingers back, but you fight him for it, your fingers unyielding, like its hold on you, and though we whisper your name again and again, it will not give you up even to release that glass, even for us, who are we to ask, and we stand suspended in this way, he and I, as he looks across you at me, wanting to thank me, I guess, so I stare instead at your face, the eyes that burrow back, the torn mouth, the damp chin that he wipes in one gentle sweep with the long side of his thumb, and I knead the muscles in your neck almost crooning,  in the middle of this party, in the middle of this crowd, when suddenly you smile straight at me, a strained smile that won't stay on; what still possesses you brushes it aside and flows through us looking for a place to fling itself out, not caring that it has us, it holds us here, attentive to the mouth that sputters whatever comes to it, it holds us in the palm of one resonating hand, in the deep muscle, in that which sees nothing and knows nothing, humming and humming.
This is the greatest thing in North America: Europe is the greatest thing in North America! High in the sky, dark in the heart, and always there Among the natural powers of sunlight and of air, Changing, second by second, shifting and changing the light, Bring fresh rain to the stone of the library steps. Under the famous names upon the pediment: <> <> <> <> And the last three also live upon the silver screen Three blocks away, in moonlight's artificial day, A double bill in the darkened palace whirled, And the veritable glittering light of the turning world's Burning mind and blazing imagination, showing, day by day And week after week the desires of the heart and mind Of all the living souls yearning everywhere From Canada to Panama, from Brooklyn to Paraguay, From Cuba to Vancouver, every afternoon and every night.
After a day's hike in a dismal downpour, Us wet to the skin, accosted by the old Soldier in the drunken kitchen Who asked if Brown's spectacles were for sale, The mists cleared, larks blew cool notes over fresh High air of the fells and the sky opened On blue water, green islands, wild Mountains stretching to white and purple clouds. I went out in a boat, caught two trapped Trout which were cooked for our dinner. The waiter gossiped to us about Wordsworth's Pathetic electioneering, but the sun Going down shot through the clouds all the gold Nature normally holds off from us As time washes round these human shores, And I had two views of the lake that won't fade: The moving waters at their priestlike task Of pure ablution, patient, watchful Like a sort of north star which in shining can Not cease to be steadfast and open-lidded Over the wonders of the great power; And diamonds sparkling on the oars, full night still Far off, but already at this latitude Polaris growing bright against the sky.
Love is a universal migraine, A bright stain on the vision Blotting out reason. Symptoms of true love Are leanness, jealousy, Laggard dawns; Are omens and nightmares  Listening for a knock, Waiting for a sign: For a touch of her fingers In a darkened room, For a searching look. Take courage, lover! Could you endure such grief At any hand but hers?
An evil, stealthy water, dark as hate,  Sunk from the light of day, 'Thwart which is hung a ruined water-gate,  Creeps on its stagnant way. Moss and the spawny duckweed, dim as air,  And green as copperas, Choke its dull current; and, like hideous hair,  Tangles of twisted grass. Above it sinister trees, as crouched and gaunt  As huddled Terror, lean; Guarding some secret in that nightmare haunt,  Some horror they have seen. Something the sunset points at from afar,  Spearing the sullen wood And hag-gray water with a single bar  Of flame as red as blood. Something the stars, conspiring with the moon,  Shall look on, and remain Frozen with fear; staring as in a swoon,  Striving to flee in vain. Something the wisp that, wandering in the night,  Above the ghastly stream, Haply shall find; and, filled with frantic fright,  Light with its ghostly gleam. Something that lies there under weed and ooze,  With wide and awful eyes And matted hair, and limbs the waters bruise,  That strives yet can not rise.
The brown shingles flap Like Mister Sam's worn-out drawers. The down man below me Regrooves his voice to sing A blues; the rain damns me in. Mother moves without her Shoes; children listen to themselves During our Sunday quiet time. The girl above dances And her steps pry open the ceiling crack That grins like a crocodile. I'm caught in the middle Of this sandwich, waiting. Our Sunday house shines; there's no Place to hide; the faster I pray The slower I go. I'm breath- Less; the air is like a noose. It's my middle life, the uncool time Between sin and salvation. The rain damns me in.
The young Master of the Wheel at Danbury absently, both hands, fondling his prick through traffic thoughtfully up on the walk (the curb was broke an inch) before me  and alighted even as the wheels ceased. I who ride like a ferocious fireman thank heaven for this breath of breeze of art, the hottest noon that ever made Route 6 mirror the forest upside down. But he arrived with the swoop of a swallow. I'd speak with him, except his only lust is in his speedy ease. Now everywhere by moments and through rips, through the brilliant curtain of July I spy the Way whereon we deviate but do not err.
God and man, though in this amphitheatre Are many works with beauty varnished, Yet all for thee, by thee were polished, And first intended by the world's creator; Like as a picture of fair grace and stature That with a margent is embroidered, Wherein are thousand smaller fancies spread, Thou art the picture, and the border nature. Not that the world is ornament to thee, But thou to it that daignst therewith to be; Yet as a step it doth thy greatness show And workman's power, whose art so high could rise In thee, and in thy border fall so low, No border unto thee, but to our eyes.
I like a man to know a lot more than I do, but I like him to be pleased and surprised he discovers I press or sew button in a jiffy. One thing, I'm bare in bed and he's not thinking masculine to wash a dish,Ha! Pettiness, Peevishness and the &lsquo;sulks&rsquo; out! I'd rather have a huge blow-up planes flying. If he's talented, that's cute: I put up with a lot. But he be interested in work, people, life and most of all me. For I am best. He also have a sense of ridiculous too. I don't care if he handsome, cozy, sexy or neat-freak. He just no be vulgar, given to drink, flirt, drug. Given this, I hope he surprise me &amp; me feel more love. I'm afraid this very minute I won't find this any man.
Sunset in Howell Wood; midwinter sunset like a fire going out. The veins in my neck stand out like drainpipes when I'm angry. Look at my dad in this photo holding a fish as big as himself. It's a life, this. Look at it. It's a life in sunsets, sunsets and fish. Midwinter sunsets like fires going out. Black against red, headgear and sky. If it was a sound it would be the sound a burning tree makes in heavy rain. Migrations and exiles, pithead to pithead, Ayrshire to Yorkshire like fires going out; sunset, smoke, midwinter drainpipes as big as himself. Lots of men in this wood walking babies and children. Midwinter sunset, time on your hands like a fish as big as yourself, a fire going out, a life in sunsets.
<> When once too often I have seen great beauty Rotting away, I shall remember duty And turn to you as to an only friend. Oh, I shall then be calm and wise and still, And feel no more a sudden twinge of pain At seeing clustered lilies in the rain, Or one tall poplar naked on a hill. I shall bow down where many knees have bent, And you may mark my prayers until it sate you; I shall be much too tired out to hate you; After a little there will be content. But do not dream, though I forget the rest, That I could love you more than second best.
one comes across them on their washing day at least I came across them below the hill I'd come to see the chapel on with its candles burning they had lit, first I heard them laughing slapping then I looked through leaves and cactus thorns splashing at my ears and could not see quite far enough down to the rippling river and did not know how to look, whether to squat, part cactuses and leaves, or crawl like a snake into Eden or openly tramp as close as I could as in a museum for indeed they were like Cezanne's bathers bathing back in Chicago, no, more like Gauguin's and scrubbing up their kids, who slipped out of their soapy hands and fell into the babbling water like dolphins diving
I am five or six years old, and my mother is on her knees. She is at the county welfare office, and something has gone wrong. The assistance she'd hoped for isn't going to happen, and she is at the end of her rope. She has three children, and whatever our daddy is doing, it either isn't enough, or it's barely too much, since her arguments will not move whomever is sitting behind this desk, looking at the top of her head. My mother has fallen for love, for mercy, for her children, to her knees. But there will be no pity for whatever sorrows have pushed her to this. To the ears I can't fully remember, her crisis must have rung of back door blues. How impatient they must have become for my mother to rise, O careless love, O easy rider, off their hard luck floor.
It froze and the ice in his engine swelled and cracked the block, calamity! a hundred bucks for negligence, nothing but. &ldquo;Damn! I meant to drain her!&rdquo; Naturally we were sympathetic. Yet think of it! it was the gentle water the innumerable drops that have no shape and so they penetrate the crevices and now have leaked away in the sun  in one pulse of power, in one night, less than three gallons broke that massy iron! Brothers, do not be desperate although we live in an age of steel, see how the gentle water cracked the block! &ldquo;Very nice.  No, I couldn't afford to pay the damage. &ldquo;Yeah,  in the junkyard!&rdquo; he explained triumphantly. No no! my car's a fine a splendid car! she rolls along on every one of her wheels fast as you'd care to drive in such a car and breaks down just as you'd expect a car like that  what can you expect from a car like that? I have learned to take the world as it is and everything is just what it is. A stupid old age is pressing on me too, what good are the appearances to me, what good is speed?
<> staggers out into the window frame; swings out from the red den where he slept to nest in the gnarled glass. Fat hero, burnished cannibal lets down a frail ladder and ties a knot, sways down to a landing with furry grace. By noon this corner is a bullet-colored city and the exhausted architect sleeps in his pale wheel, waits without pity for a gold visitor or coppery captive, his aerial enemies spinning headlong down the window to the trap. The street of string shakes now and announces a surprised angel in the tunnel of thread. Spider dances down his wiry heaven to taste the moth. A little battle begins and the prison trembles. The round spider hunches like a judge. The wheel glistens. But this transparent town that caves in at a breath is paved with perfect steel. The victim hangs by his feet, and the spider circles invisible avenues, weaving a grave. By evening the web is heavy with monsters, bright constellation of wasps and bees, breathless, surrendered. Bronze skeletons dangle on the wires and a thin wing flutters. The medieval city hangs in its stars. Spider lumbers down the web and the city stretches with the weight of his walking. By night we cannot see the flies' faces and the spider, rocking.
 This is a circling of itself and you  A form of words, compact and compromise,  Prepared in the false dawn of the half-true Beyond which the shapes of truth materialize.  This is a blind with sunlight filtering through.  This is a stirring in the silent hours, As lovers do with thoughts they cannot frame  Or leave, but bring to darkness like night-flowers, Words never choosing but the words choose them   Birds crowing, wind whistling off pale stars.  This is a night-cry, neither here nor there, A ghostly echo from the clamorous dead  Who cried aloud in anger and despair Outlasting stone and bronze, but took instead  Their lost grins underground with them for ever.  This is at one remove, a substitute For final answers; but the wise man knows  To cleave to the one living absolute Beyond paraphrase, and shun a shrewd repose.  The words are aching in their own pursuit  To say &lsquo;I love you&rsquo; out of indolence As one might speak at sea without forethought,  Drifting inconsequently among islands. This is a way of airing my distraught  Love of your silence; you are the soul of silence.
Bright cards above the fire bring no friends near, fire cannot keep the cold from seeping in. Spindrift sparkle and candles on the tree make brave pretence of light; but look out of doors: Evening already surrounds the curtained house, draws near, watches; gardens are blue with frost, and every carol bears a burden of exile, a song of slaves. Come in, then, poverty, and come in, death: this year too many lie cold, or die in cold for any small room's warmth to keep you out. You sit in empty chairs, gleam in unseeing eyes; having no home now, you cast your shadow over the atlas, and rest in the restlessness of our long nights as we lie, dreaming of Europe. A painted bird or boat above the fire, a fire in the hearth, a candle in the dark, a dark excited tree, fresh from the forest, are all that stand between us and the wind. The wind has tales to tell of sea and city, a plague on many houses, fear knocking on the doors; how venom trickles from the open mouth of death, and trees are white with rage of alien battles. Who can be happy while the wind recounts its long sagas of sorrow? Though we are safe in a flickering circle of winter festival we dare not laugh; or if we laugh, we lie, hearing hatred crackle in the coal, the voice of treason, the voice of love.
Took down. The dead have life. Their dreadful night accompanies our Springs. Touch the next leaf. Such darkness lives there, where a last grief sings. Light blinds the whirling graves. Lost under rainwet earth the letters run. A finger grieves, Touching worn names, bearing daughter and son. Here the quick life was borne, A fountain quenched, fountains with sufferings crowned. Creeds of the bone Summoned from darkness what no Sibyl found. Truly the meek are blest Past proud men's trumpets, for they stilled their fame Till this late blast Gave them their muted, and their truest name. Sunk are the stones, green-dewed, Blunted with age, touched by cool, listening grass. Vainly these died, Did not miraculous silence come to pass. Yet they have lovers' ends, Lose to hold fast, as violets root in frost. With stronger hands I see them rise through all that they have lost. I take a sunflower down, With light's first faith persuaded and entwined. Break, buried dawn, For the dead live, and I am of their kind.
I dreamed I was back in the playground, I was about four feet high Yes dreamed I was back in the playground, standing about four feet high Well the playground was three miles long and the playground was five miles wide It was broken black tarmac with a high wire fence all around Broken black dusty tarmac with a high fence running all around And it had a special name to it, they called it The Killing Ground Got a mother and a father, they're one thousand years away The rulers of The Killing Ground are coming out to play Everybody thinking: &lsquo;Who they going to play with today?&rsquo;  Well you get it for being Jewish  And you get it for being black  Get it for being chicken  And you get it for fighting back  You get it for being big and fat  Get it for being small  Oh those who get it get it and get it  For any damn thing at all Sometimes they take a beetle, tear off its six legs one by one Beetle on its black back, rocking in the lunchtime sun But a beetle can't beg for mercy, a beetle's not half the fun I heard a deep voice talking, it had that iceberg sound &lsquo;It prepares them for Life&rsquo; but I have never found Any place in my life worse than The Killing Ground.
Not many years from now when they dig through the debris they will find a stone among the bones and not knowing what they are looking for or finding have found they will throw it away never realizing how deep the bones dug to find the stone never stopping to listen to what it is whispering or see when they smash it how the light splinters
In my city, grass grows over the old quarters, The rain slides unobstructed through palace roofs; Today, tomorrow, will bring barbarians to the gate. These things are not things to think about. The mind beholds them and stubbornly snaps shut. We have made our monuments differently of late  Our thoughts are more than versions of our lives, And our reflections are more than mirrors. We breathe the air of the only art there is: If I should add a descant to a melody, Rework a hymn that has been old five hundred years, I share interpretations set down once by saints. Multitudes have shed their lives for me. The eloquent lines my ancestors drew Rude hands imitate in every land I know: Our own expressions will resurface someday in paint. It is not hard to live in the world. We have no choice. What we labor long to make is what will last ... If I break into song, generations give their voice. We are ceremonious, and live in evidence of the past.
<> Upon the warm and dusty ground we lie, Rehearsing the gesture by which a man will die. Do not pull the trigger: squeeze, instead, Gradually, so that you will not know The instant of persuasion and release: (Nor will the soldier who receives the lead Be quite aware of the instant he is dead And perhaps at peace.) Neither the slayer nor the slain Will be quite aware: They will share The ignorance of the pain: At least so we are told. In the distance willows tremble in a wind; The warm dust blows; Death finds the paper target; neither the mind Nor the finger knows. The stillness bleeds with the sound of the bullet's curse, The obscene cry, And in the summer sunlight men rehearse That men may die.
On a mountain by a fountain,  By a faintly falling stream, Where upon the moss and flowers, Sparkling, fell the spray in showers,  In the moonlight's mystic beam,  Once a maiden came to dream,  Came to sit and sigh and dream: On a mountain by a fountain,  By a faintly falling stream. To the fountain on the mountain  Rode a youth upon a steed; In his hair an eagle's feather; Round his waist a belt of leather,  Wampum-wrought with shell and bead;  In his hands a hollow reed,  In his hands a magic reed: To the fountain on the mountain  Rode a youth upon a steed.
Not so fast, waiter. If there are those who like sweet wine And have earned the price of it, Then they should have it. Plonk will do for me. If there's cork in it Or lipstick on the rim, I shan't make a fuss. Some of us will be lucky to get vinegar Pushed at us. But for others You had better be ready to serve sweet wine In clean glasses, unchipped, And without a speech. Some customers are by definition Right, And do not require to be told About a fine dry wine Deriving from individually crushed grapes Grown on a certain slope on a small hill Overlooking a distinguished river. Some of your customers Have already been individually crushed. They know dryness in the mouth, A harsh taste at the back of the throat. If sweet wine is what they fancy You will give them sweet wine. And there should be room on your tray For ginger beer, orangeade, cocoa, tea And even the vulgar vintage of colas.
The woods which give me their silence, their ancient Douglas firs and red cedars, their ferns, are not the wilderness. They're contained in the two-mile circumference of an almost-island, a park in city limits. Pleasure-boats crowd at weekends into the small bay. The veils hiding the mountain are not always natural cloud. Eagle and heron speak of solitude, but when you emerge from forest shade the downtown skyline rears up, phantasmagoric but near, across the water. Yet the woods, the lake, the great-winged birds, the vast mountain at the horizon, are Nature: metonymy of the spirit's understanding knows them to be a concentrate of all Thoreau or Wordsworth knew by that word, Nature: &lsquo;a never-failing principle of joy and purest passion.&rsquo; Thoreau's own pond was bounded by the railroad, punctuated by the &lsquo;telegraph trees&rsquo; and their Aeolian wires. All of my dread and all of my longing hope that Earth may outwit the huge stupidity of its humans, can find their signs and portents here, their recapitulations of joy and awe. This fine, incised two inches of goldsmith-work just drifted down, can speak as well for  and tree means depth of roots, uprisen height, outreaching branches. This musical speech of wavelets jounced against reeds as a boat's wake tardily reaches the shore,is  encircling the terrestrial globe which as a child I loved to spin slowly upon its creaking axis blue globe we have seen now, round, small as an apple, afloat in the wilderness we name so casually, as if we knew it or ever could know it, &lsquo;Space.&rsquo;
I knew I must go again to that blissful land, But I made my choice: I would go to it in such a season As I had never known there, autumn or winter. I have a capable heart, but I would not let it bear To see that place again in the honey of summer or spring. With a murderous delight, I knew that in mid-sorrow I wanted to see that land impoverish itself in the onset of autumn, Or in the grimy fists of winter be clenched, and, if possible, torn. I had forgotten that in that blissful land Winter but rarely came.   There was no snow, no storm.     There was only my own shame And consternation that the clouds should break apart, And sunlight flood the bays and promontories And the sea compose itself to smiles of welcome. Well: since this unlooked-for winter-summer vacancy Must be sometime or other cleanly learned and loved, I would love it, cleanly, now. Perhaps I could learn it later: Perhaps it could live in me, and I in it: Solitary, emptied, charmless and dispossessed  (I wondered at that word, so easily come by: I was &lsquo;dispossessed&rsquo;: and yet it did not deprive me.     I could not but love that light, That irresistible, seductive glow Which led or followed me wherever I went, And as I knew it must finally drew me To climb our well-known hill.)     They were there still: On the promontory, the gun and the broken fort; Our bench of stone, the grass-beknotted floor, The bushes, and a yellow winter-flower we cannot have seen  before. And I looked from high on the warm familiar sea And heard behind me that beloved rustling smile Of tree and bush and flower and flower and bush and tree; I turned and also smiled, as if we were hand in hand. It was not as I had thought.     For the other forces of that blissful land, That I had never known, revealed themselves, They were not as I had thought. Breathless they seemed, and a frost grinned on the stone. Converging they seemed, slowly upon that spot. They stared at our stone bench.     (Oh, for the love of God remember, I had come in this last hour to believe that everything Inside this land still loved and would love me always.) I have said: I turned. Trees, stone, and broken headland, Stone, archway, earth, stone, grass, stone and now-roaring sea Saw me for the first time, and saw my face, saw me. They paused in concerted silence.     I saw them, and they saw me. They assessed me, as it were, Then murmured among themselves, seeming to choose a  spokesman (It was not a light confabulation that they held) And at last their chosen spokesman, at a common signal That it should speak for the whole of that winter concourse In its rigid courtroom of damnation and grinning stone, An icy wind slowly approached me, paused, searched my face, And screamed in rancour, contempt, and disappointment: &lsquo;It was not   alone?&rsquo;
Go on working around my hairline with a blade and all you'll come to is a white sheen of bone and all that would tell you is that I'm, what else, human. I can tell you that now. Don't make yourself into such a fine instrument of knowledge that you slice uselessly back into your own hand shocking yourself. There is a body, or soul, under your skin too, but you won't assuage your doubts about it by unpeeling me; no, that will uncover nothing but your worse original anxiety. If I speak with formal heaviness, that's the weight of stiff grief bending down leaves, and the mild rain spotting their dust into rings. No I don't much like this bland authoritative tone either but it is what I took from years of reworded loss. So if my skin slid downwards to the ground you would see only a standing pillar of blood. Believe that this would be true also of you.  Such distanced care for self, rendered as knowing, makes anybody ill: I'll drop this clinic voice to say that this hot scowl on songs marks rage for closeness just not found in a true human love  burn, work, burn blue, since one clean word on someone's blank makes salt well under any tongue, am I to go unswollen, arm across my shoulders good, that's who off the end of a wrist? so tired of howling more more grand babe yet if there's angel too this thick extent of longing's ugly as it's true. Heavy water. Show your wound: Ah yes mine's deeper: Is that my shaming subject after all. Best get this done on paper no-one hears so I'll stay still in life where I hear water speaking, may stand where light falls as the plain light will no that lot skims on wire rhetoric, totters from tightly civic pause to weeping open cut and back but can't get balanced; its figure sways with outflung arms, I do, to hold the deadly wish to be white eye stripped out of human motion as if sight crashed to clearness, clean of me: Brown rock and leaden sea. Crows in the wood faced to the wind, pinned on high branches. Dark blobs. Clacks on the wind. The drumming light. Yet no-one should say to me, Nothing's enough for you, ever. But I do want to kill and die.
The women of the Nile wear gold  Under the black. Bright crescent moons, Three in each ear and the fold  Of a shawl may hide large axe- Like diadems, braided gilt. They seek  To catch about them what the desert lacks In brilliance of the shining perfect  Surfaces they shield from the sun's Cheap metal and the disrespect  Of men. They cloak their own beauty In a similar doubt, as if  Through sight a theft might be Accomplished, or a kiss. Jewels they must  Take safely to the grave, Where ornaments uphold the dust,  But lips and cheeks they bring To a husband's bed, who knows  That a glance is valued like a ring.
When he got into bed, he was dead. Oh god, god, god, he said. She watched him take off his shoes and kneel there to look for the change which had fallen out of his pocket. Old Mr. Jones whom nobody loves went to market for it, and almost found it under a table, but by that time was unable. And the other day two men, who had been known as friends, were said to be living together again.
How I woke to the color-tone as of peach-juice dulcet bells were tolling. And how my pleasure was in the strength of my back, in my noble shoulders, the cool smooth flesh cylinders of my arms. How I seemed a woman tall and full-rounded, ready to step into daylight sound as a bell but continued to awake further, and found myself myself, smaller, not thin but thinner, nervous, who hurries without animal calm. And how the sweet blur of the bells lapsed, and ceased, and it was not morning.
The hare running for life in the sparse growth Broke cover, His ears low and his legs driving, But sure blew the shot, And shattered and mauled he thrashed in the rubble, His entrails sprawling the red ruck, And those angered ants at their work. Then surely that time Evil hooded my heart; Surely that time The source of all hurt and harm and heavy woe Pinioned me high in the frozen air, Gazing far down the blue height of my indifference, My ears stoppered against those piteous cries That swam up about me, My stone eyes cold in my iron face, The central terror and the separate hurt Far at my feet. Between that time and this The subtle and transigent forces of growth Have altered my mind; Nor can I now say the way that it was, But ice thawed, Height dwindled, The dwindling height threw me racked on the ground by that bleeding hare, My torn flesh and my splintered bone Tangled with his. Against the frozen impossible fact of redemption (No act undone, The hare mewling and jerking Down time from now on) I draw all my strength, And wear as I can the measure of pity, The meed of forbearance, And the temperance fathered of guilt.
Joy is a trick in the air; pleasure is merely contemptible, the dangled Carrot the ass follows to market or precipice; But limitary pain the rock under the tower and the hewn coping That takes thunder at the head of the turret  Terrible and real. Therefore a mindless dervish carving himself With knives will seem to have conquered the world. The world's God is treacherous and full of unreason; a torturer, but also The only foundation and the only fountain. Who fights him eats his own flesh and perishes of hunger; who hides in the grave To escape him is dead; who enters the Indian Recession to escape him is dead; who falls in love with the God is washed clean Of death desired and of death dreaded. He has joy, but joy is a trick in the air; and pleasure, but pleasure is contemptible; And peace; and is based on solider than pain. He has broken boundaries a little and that will estrange him; he is monstrous, but not To the measure of the God.... But I having told you  However I suppose that few in the world have energy to hear effectively  Have paid my birth-dues; am quits with the people.
 Not flying, but floating As if to land lightly, seed oneself, rise again:  A sycamore key twisting  Into its grass nest, life run   To all that brown  Under all that blue, breeding Its ash leaves, tufts of grey light, thistledown,  Each spider laddering  Its perdurable cord, sun   Still burning down  These flowers, their heads breaking Out into blue wings, white wings, pinks flapped  From a grey bed, silks taking  Each skirl of wind: dropped,   The catch slipped.  And a parachute is falling: A scallop of pale flesh, open-eyed, rose of death   Crete, Arnheim. Baling  Out, out, under the flight-path   Goes the ghost of a moth,  Ghost-moth, a soul visiting The mansions of the dead, loss, a dark habitation?  Only a child's handkerchief, twirling  String on a dull stone,   Or lead man  Finding his feet, slipping Quickly through garden green, against cloud, caught  On a plum-branch, dropping  A little further into night,   The crumpled sheets  Where a child sleeping Free-falls his limbs, landscapes, his here and there;  Takes his bearing  By dream and star,   And chooses air  As one unharnessed, leaping, Span from his plane through night, forest, snowfalls,  Passed out and through, spidering  His unsupported miles,   And woke with men, not angels.
Some awful grating sound as if some monstrous nose were being blown. <> moves slow through the water. Velvet purr, resting  Slosh, slush, longer wash of it. Con- verses. <> then chatter, all the way home.
Embodiment of all the beautiful That crowns the year, O May! is come with thee. For miles and miles along the rugged hills, Where in and out the Cumberland must wind, And spring her first response of green doth find, A rapt'rous beauty all the valley fills. The yellow sun with summer at his heels, Betokeneth the time about to be, Siestas, days and nights alive with wings, The stirring of a million living things. The month is full of roses, perfumed air, And crooning bees upon the clover's breast, The morning woodlands ring with music sweet, The Zephyrs whisper to the corn, And echo back the hills the dinner horn, But all in tune and harmony complete. In blissful self-abandonment awhile, Here on thy lap, sweet May, O! let me rest, And dream and dream, till lulled by sight and sound In unison to all the earth around.
Yes, the standing on the uppermost stair at four, I think, at night or in years my folks would know. The going &lsquo;Why.&rsquo; The being there and going &lsquo;Why.&rsquo; The grand unreadable books all around, the stairs down to a guessed end. Yes, the owning a name and suddenly at four in age, that treasure intercepted, keen to have it told, the Why, the Why ... I'd like to know what answer I expected, before I got the &lsquo;Why? It has to be that way.&rsquo; Then pale absorption of the worst, a blip in the young brain, after which all is a green examined quiver, nursed by kindly terminable patients, and the rich forget-it of the flushed young sufferers, the adolescent shrug of my own shoulders. Then yes, the lying in another garden as the hour seeped for the first of my grandfathers in one of the downstairs rooms. I saw the curtain gather. I smoked under our giant oak, our Charles II oak, I followed its arms through calm, gradual argument, towards the smaller points, the versions, the odd forms, the dead-ends, and a single one towards a bud on the white sky, then out, away.
On a ground beaten gold by running and Over the Aztec crest of the sky and Past the white religious faces of the Bulls and far beyond, the ball goes flying. Sun and moon and all the stars of the moon Are dancing across our eyes like the flight of armies And the loser dies.Dark player and bright Play for the twinned stiff god of life and death. They die and become the law by which they fight. Walls grow out of this light, branches out of the stone, And fire running from the farthest winds Pours broken flame on these fantastic sands Where, sunlit, stands the goddess of earth and death, A frightful peasant with work-hardened hands. But over the field flash all the colors of summer, The battle flickers in play, a game like sacrifice. The sun rides over, the moon and all her stars. Whatever is ready to eat us, we have found This place where the gods play out the game of the sky And bandy life and death across a summer ground.
I woke up as a flying speck in the sunshine which bothered me for a while, because I missed you, though whirling in the air was a thrill. I zoomed along the breeze tracks, learning to accelerate into gravity, floating up at the last by hitching on to a draught from the door crack. But nobody notices a mote, so, bored, I moved into calmer air. Even here there were surges and lulls which buffeted me around waves of sound rocking me towards your ear. Everywhere on the body, touch makes sound but the ear is the one place you can't tell them apart, where even the noise of a fingertip rustles and explodes. I was glad to see you: I thought I might know in my human life how to touch you lightly after this rehearsal as a piece of dust. I tripped against your lobe just so you would know I was there, and felt the fine hairs rise in the notch above. As the air pushed me round the helix, I leaned outwards on the bend like a biker so I could press against the rim in a long brush as the air flowed past just gritty enough for you to feel. Swept into the bowl of the concha I felt you move as I tickled against your skin and skidded softly with the momentum into your skull.
It will not hurt to wait, unetherised, in a high leather seat and be tipped to the light. And it will not hurt at all to roll one sleeve past the crook of the elbow and offer a long pale forearm. The auxiliary nurse is an old retainer: a slow methodical man in carpet slippers who delivers a purple bauble of methylated spirits. His free hand cups the flame. He swabs from the wrist upwards, tattoos a roll call of allergies with a gold biro, full stops each word with a separate pipette then runs through each drop with a burnt needle. It is no problem. Similarly, in radiography, it is no trouble to be laughingly bundled up to the template, to be minutely adjusted, and later, with the negatives against a clear blue sky what cannot speak cannot lie: my stupid grin, my empty eyes, my hollow head. Everything is O.K. Outside, a warm front from Europe breezes in. No snow this Christmas, no kristallnacht of ice to shatter the puddles. The tattoos I have left intact, a heat rash still expands the word CAT, proof that the kittens will have to go or be banned from the bedroom at the very least. I kick them out but they sulk in the garden, and when I relent they flounce in like ruined children, curl their noses at the top of the milk and will not be loved.
My bent is not Penelope's; I lack the patience of her posturing droop, that weaving weaving endlessly do and undo and at day's end all to begin again like dustmop: classic frustrate employ. Nor is Circe my intent; camouflaging soul with pendant dangles, idling all whiles, waterproof mascara smiling through the years, cheapjewel flashing emerald the green-laved shoals.  All play and no work makes for dull joy. While you, Ulysses, how do you dream of home? As a clean cool-sheeted castle, where violins and lilacs ply the air rather than frying smells in the kitchen? The children's flesh unquarreling smooth; no buttons missing; not a frayed collar in a disordered drawer? No such island looms on land or sea. Ah, neither Penelope nor Circe do I plan: yet Circe am, cradling, cooing, caroling the unwrinkled glossy sea; and Penelope pleading aging return again to me as I would be contented wonderment to the wanderer wanderer I would also be with you to return to as my key bread and bath and shared bed for the tired travailler shared fruit of wine for the gleaning reveler  but how to tread the dusty city blocks and greenplunge out to sea? Beloved bedeviled Ulysses, we share a perplexity.
No doubt, the room could hear what was going on, Or, rather, sounds could pretend themselves at home Without disturbing a leaf in the jardini&egrave;re. There were lilies there, which neither toiled nor spun, And roses worked to the stems in silk, for time Was a bunch of immortelles; had enough to spare Of itself to web, delay those messengers Whose messages, unforgotten, remained unread. Those  Safe behind glass, looked strange as any strangers; A cast-iron Norman fireplace burned the dead With invisible fire as hard and pure as frost. And everything there knew it must be for best To be still multiples of their quiet selves, Consuming air, as the votive candles do In a cool temenos where God is lost In his own dark shawls of wonder, the salves Of a dying silence let something through Which was not the sound of children on ricketing stairs, But the rustle of painted leaves on a balustrade Of painted cloth, where the Passchendaele soldier stood Waiting for Charon to ferry him down the years, The spick shroud crimped for the mantelpiece parade And all kept safe under the veil, the hood, While the net-curtains eased shadows about the light As a green screen parts, unparts, over a glade Littered with tiny icons of skull and bone Where the dry moss pads about on its mild grey feet And the uninvited bomber scrawls overhead; And all the desires are here, and are clean gone.
Our Juggernaut seems to roll by itself over people but there are really men who tend the wheels and engine only a few hours a day and jump off and go and play at home or on the links and eat well and drink drinks. Many of them are certainly much happier than I and today one came with a poem that he had made in his free time (though I am ill I am still willing to correct the writing of the young) but I would not talk to him about his poem, I would not talk about a poem to him.
i never knew the coal that burned dark between us. i understood your reinvented fire. appreciated the dance, music and optimism in you. recognized the writer, lover, professor running in you. quietly this evening i wished we had had winter-fights lengthy talks, small arguments or deafening disagreements stretching into the night of our imaginations. i'll miss those nonconversations between novelist and poet. i'll think of you while thanking you as i and others continue our majestic journey paging through the inspiring puzzles and prizes of your language.
P&iacute;ndaro no soy, sino caballero De San Patricio; y nuestro santo Siglos atr&aacute;s se hizo mejicano. Todos aqu&iacute; alaban las mujeres Y con raz&oacute;n, como divinos seres  Por eso entrar&aacute; en mis deberes A vuestra Olimpiada mejicana El origen explicar de la corona: En su principio fu&eacute; femenina.... Antes que Hercules con paso largo Metros midiera para el estadio Miles de esfuerzos as&iacute; alentado  Ya antes, digo, all&iacute; existia Otra carrera mas apasionada La cual presidia la Diosa Hera. La virgen que, a su fraternidad Supero con maxima velocidad Ganaba el premio de la santidad: La corona de olivo.... Me perdonar&aacute; El respetable, si de Atalanta Sue&ntilde;o, la corredora enga&ntilde;ada Con tres manzanas, pero de oro fino.... Y si los mitos griegos hoy resumo Es que parecen de acuerdo pleno, A la inventora primeval del juego, A la Santa Madre, m&aacute;s honores dando Que no a su portero deportivo. En tres cientas trece Olimpiadas Este nego la entrada a las damas Amenazandolas, ai, con espadas! Aqu&iacute;, por fin, brindemos por la linda Enriqueta de Basilio: la primera Que nos honra con antorcha y corona.
When you signal to your worms, Death, as soon you must, Do you think you'll turn my life To mouthfuls of dust? Never fear: for when your worms At their work begin, They will stuff in them defeat; They will gnaw chagrin! Scatter all you want my bones, Furious at me; Never think you'll dig to my Immortality! In my singing I am safe: When your gnawing starts, I shall live on other lips And dream in other hearts!
<> This house before you and see flaming down To ashes and to mysteries the old town Where Shakespeare was a lodger for Mountjoy; Here played the mighty child who for his toy Must have the world king, wizard, sage and clown, Queen, fiend and trollop and with no more renown, May be, than friends and envy might annoy. And in this little grave-yard, if you will, He stands again, as often long ago He stood considering what it signified. We may have doubted, or be doubting still  But whether it be all so, or all not so, One has to walk up Wood Street from Cheapside.
Memory, my own prince of disaster, My ancient of night. In the scored silence I see the dead. They file past the fixed camera  The ritual wave, and the smile, And goodnight. For an instant They are there, caught In their clothes and their gestures; Their white faces glow In the murk of the film, Absurdly alive. How little I own This family of the dead, Who are now part of night. Memory, my own prince of disaster, When you go, Where's the night?
Now it is cold: where the snow was melting the walk crackles with black ice beneath my careful steps; and the snow is old and pitted, here grey with ashes and there yellow with sand. The walks lie in the cold shadow of houses; pigeons and sparrows are in a hollow for cold, out of the wind; but here, where the sunshine pours through a narrow street upon a little tree, black and naked of every leaf, the sparrows are in the sun, thick upon the twigs. Those who in their lives braved the anger of their fellows, bronze statues now, with outstretched arm or sword brave only the weather. I find myself talking aloud as I walk; that is bad. Only Don Juan would believe I am in conversation with the snow-covered statues; only St. Francis that I am talking to the sparrows in the naked bushes, to the pigeons in the snow.
her strength may have come from not having the good things early in life like her own bed, unused clothes, &ldquo;good looks,&rdquo; uncritical friends or from the knee of her great grandmother. whatever path she took she was learning to become small danger. organizer of mothers, overseer of broken contracts, a doer of large deeds, unafraid of sky scrapers &amp; monotone bureaucrats. monotones labeled her demands crippling &amp; unusual. she urged drinkable water, working elevators, clean playgrounds, heat, garbage collection and the consolation of tenant's dreams. many damned her, others thought her professional agitator &amp; provocateur dismissing her as a man hating bulldagger that was communist inspired. she was quick burn against the enemy a stand up boxer unattached to niceties and the place of women. she was waterfalls in the brain her potency as it comes needs to be packaged &amp; overnight expressed to Black homes; to be served with morning meals.
<>  hear A sound? a little sound! My curious ear Is dinned with flying noises; and the tree Goes whisper, whisper, whisper, silently, Till all its whispers spread into the sound Of a dull roar....  Lie closer to the ground: The shade is deep, and He may pass us by, We are so very small, and His great eye, Customed to starry majesties, may gaze Too wide to spy us hiding in the maze:  Ah, misery! The sun has not yet gone, And we are naked! He will look upon Our crouching shame! May make us stand  upright, Burning in terror O that it were night ! He may not come ... What! Listen!  Listen now  He's here! Lie closer ...
FULL SPEED ASTERN) m usil(age)ini sticks tuh de mans l (hutch)hutchinson says sweet guinea pigs do it it buy uh cupl un wait k (relijinisde)o(peemuvdepipl) marx okays jippymugun roomur j e(wut) hova in big cumbine wid i (check undublcheck) babbitt (GOD SAVE THE UNCOMMONWEALTH OF HUMANUSETTS
Gross, with protruding ears, Sleek hair, brisk glance, fleshy and yet alert, Red, full, and satisfied, Cased in obtuseness confident not to be hurt, He sits at a little table In the crowded, congenial glare and noise, jingling Coins in his pocket; sips His glass, with hard eye impudently singling A woman here and there:  Women and men, they are all priced in his thought, All commodities staked In the market, sooner or later sold and bought. &ldquo;Were I he,&rdquo; you are thinking, You with the dreamer's forehead and pure eyes, &ldquo;What should I lose? All, All that is worth the striving for, all my prize; &ldquo;All the truth of me, all Life that is wonder, pity and fear, requiring Utter joy, utter pain, From the heart that the infinite hurts with deep  desiring. &ldquo;Why is it I am not he? Chance? The grace of God? The mystery's plan? He, too, is human stuff, A kneading of the old, brotherly slime of man. &ldquo;Am I a lover of men, And turn abhorring as from fat slug or snake? Lives obstinate in me too Something the power of angels could not unmake?&rdquo; O self-questioner! None Unlocks your answer. Steadily look, nor flinch. This belongs to your kind, And knows its aim, and fails not itself at a pinch. It is here in the world and works, Not done with yet. Up, then, let the test be tried! Dare your uttermost, be Completely, and of your own, like him, be justified.
Tourist, beware. The Sacred Bay of Corinth is charged with aluminum; at the Crossroads, almost visible, Oedipus waits. Have an offering ready, and a sacrifice. You may ask one question; be specific. The answer has always been the same. Look for it among the broken stones under your sandal or in the unbroken light of the Mediterranean sky. And remember this: virgins were said to be unreliable, so they chose as priestess a woman of a certain age. By the moon your flesh is the color of marble ... you are that age now.
Before I could walk, I was wheeled  Felt vaguely eternal, Mother behind me a mystery Out of the shadow of whose magyar coat I crawled, Started making history. Granny confused me, embittered By ceaseless politics. Mother changed religion In the Cold War, and my vague eternity shattered  It must have been about then. Behind long hair, dark glasses, I hid myself, a student walking the streets Of East Berlin, a child of the privileged classes, Trying to make opposites meet. The prostitutes in the lights Of the motor showrooms, along Potsdamerstrasse Kept their hours, from afternoon into night, As back to the West I passed Amid human confusion  Coated like magyars, women of yesteryear Swarmed in the Eastern Sector, Mother's old fashions  The world must be going nowhere. ... &lsquo;... Your magyar coat, your magyar coat, What did I want to say? ... Oh nothing, some nonsense ...&rsquo; Granny is pestering Mother. It sticks in my throat, Like trying to explain my presence By an image, at history's Real checkpoints, checkpoints I can't circumvent  Where nonsense was good enough for eternal mystery, I want to be sure what is meant.
With the gulls' hysteria above me I walked near these breakneck seas This morning of mists, and saw them, Tall the mysterious queens Waltzing in on the broad Ballroom of the Atlantic. All veils and waterfalls and Wailings of the distraught, These effigies of grief moved Like refugees over the water; The icy empresses of the Atlantic Rising to bring me omen. These women woven of ocean And sorrows, these far sea figures, With the fish and skull in their Vapour of faces, the icicles Salting down from their eyelashes, As I walked by the foreshore Moved towards me, ululating: O dragnet of the sweet heart Bind us no longer! The cage Bursts with passions and bones, And every highspirited fish Lives off our scuttled love! I stood on a stone, the gulls Crossed my vision with wings And my hearing with caterwauling; The hurdling wave, backbroken, Died at my feet. Taller Than the towering hour above me The homing empresses of the sea Came among me. And, shivering, I felt death nuzzling in the nest Of the diurnally shipwrecked Drowned nocturnally breast.
<> You righteous! with eyes oped and utterance terse, Whose greed of energies would fain disperse Ere any mould be cast, or roundel sung, Your gentler brothers still at play among The smirch and jangle of the universe, Mere fool-blind trespassers for you to curse, The Sabbath-breakers, the unchristened young;  Peace! These, too, know: these are as ye employed, Nor of laborious help and value void, Living; who, faithful to their fellows' need, Fling life away for truth, art, fatherland, Like a gold largess from a princely hand, Without one trading thought of heavenly meed.
these from my mother's greatgrandmother's rosebush white roses are probably the least probable roses of her improbable world and without any doubt of impossible ours  God's heaven perhaps comprises poems(my mother's greatgrandmother surely would know) of purest poem and glories of sheerest glory a little more always less believably so than(how should even omnipotent He feel sorry while these were blossoming)roses which really are dreams of roses  &ldquo;and who&rdquo; asked my love &ldquo;could begin to imagine quite such eagerly innocent whoms of merciful sweetness except Himself?&rdquo;  &ldquo;noone unless it's a smiling&rdquo; she told me &ldquo;someone&rdquo;(and smiled) &ldquo;who holds Himself as the little white rose of a child&rdquo;
All meet here with us, finally: the uptown, way-west, den of inconstant moralities. Faces up: all my faces turned up to the sun. Summer's mist nods against the trees till distance grows in my head like an antique armada dangled motionless from the horizon. Unbelievable changes. Restorations. Each day like my ni&ntilde;a's fan tweaking the flat air back and forth till the room is a blur of flowers. Intimacy takes on human form ... &amp; sheds it like a hide. Lips, eyes, tiny lace coughs reflected on night's stealth. Tonight, one star. eye of the dragon. The Void signaling. Reminding someone it's still there. It's these empty seconds I fill with myself. Each a recognition. A complete utterance. Here, it is color; motion; the feeling of dazzling beauty Flight. As the trapeeze rider leans with arms spread wondering at the bar's delay
O lovers, lovers, today we've fallen into a whirl- pool: who knows how to swim? Though the torrent's flow should overrun its banks and every wave raise a hump like a camel, why should the waterfowl worry? It's the airborne bird that should be wary. Faces lit with awe, we're schooled in crest and seafloor and know that swelling rivers and flood mean more teeming fishes. Old one, hand us a towel; water, make way. In every head this wind stirs a different passion; drunkenly, madly, you draw me on won't you say where to? Wherever you go, I'm with you still, you who are my eyes and their brightness; if you wish, draw me down to drunkenness; if you will, light me to annihilation. Look: the world is like Mount Sinai, and we, like Moses, are tongue-tied wanderers; every moment, a revelation arrives and breaks the mountain to pieces. One part becomes dark green, one part lily-white; one grain becomes a pearl, another ruby and amber. You who want to see Him, look at this mountain chain of His. O mountain, what wind has blown down you? We've grown giddy with the echo. O gardener, gardener, why have you come to uproot us? If we've pilfered your grapes, you've left us penniless!
The clock here is quiet. Into the rain's applause, a woman rises fatigued. Tablets dissolve in a glass by the bed. The wind lifts, branches animating inconsonant darkness. She undoes her gown, lays it over the bedpost. Seductive leg hair. Almost dawn, she makes coffee like that. Low thunder, glints of lightning, the dog's concern.  <> her mother told her,  <> And why not the hiss and wake of cars on the wet road bursting into transparence under tents of streetlight, winking out into afterglow. Glances that catch anonymous faces at windows in early lit houses like her own. This way she drifts off, mesmerically. The bathtub overflowing.
Eight for black, nine for white. Ten for a step and its echo at night. Eleven for credit, twelve for cash. Thirteen for pickpockets milling the crush. Fourteen for blackmail, fifteen for tax. Sixteen for passion in cul-de-sacs. Seventeen steps from the porch to the car. Eighteen for life, with good behaviour. Nineteen pounds ninety-nine pence-ful of lager. Twenty plus tips for a blow and a popper. Twenty-one faces pressed flat to the window. Twenty-two magpies half-lost in shadow. One for white, two for black. Three chances left to guess why they attack.
Quit writing and in Morocco raise a beard Go without a hat like poor Clew who braved the desert heat. Or if you will like Herb sit on a hotel balcony and watch your ship while the girls bring wines and food to you privately. The language? Make money. Organize The language. Right.
All day the mists crept stealthily from sea,  A silent army of invading white, That planted glimmering banners on the height, And blotted out each rock and hill and tree: Far as the eye could see, mysteriously, Wild tents arose; it seemed that all the coasts Of all the world had sent their specter hosts To 'siege the land which Autumn held in fee. The landscape, hanging a disconsolate head,  Tears and dejection in its attitude,  Dripped, mourning for the Summer that was gone; While through the garden, where the flowers lay dead, A phantom moved, of melancholy mood,  Trailing the ghost of beauty, dead at dawn.
Ah, what's the plight of hapless man! Ah, what's the cure? Ah, what's the cure? The merriment of Monday! Sunday will not do it, citizen. Sunday is too solemn Tragic and pure. Dull virtue gets nowhere, You need the merriment of Monday. A small jackass Would climb from a pit, With a hey and a ho and a hey, hey, hey. Gentleman in frock coat would preach to it, Hey, ho. So now shall we laugh ourselves awake, And keep alive for pity's sake, With merriment, merriment, merriment break The charm (the dead charm) The image (the image) And vows (the cold vows) we take, With the merriment of Monday.
But in these years, what is free, what is strong? People, strength.He had heard this always, The mud of our towns turning into stone cities, The fire of our wealth, space of our own time Flowing beyond our eyes.Now he can see the older Faces rising:authors of our belief, image-faces of active Sources like lines his father called in the morning, The music of difference, all alive. The founders of law and this people, who set in diversity The base of our living. Actual diversity of days and sources, smiling in disagreement, strengthened by one another, Until the idea of diversity becomes our strength, sacred to us. The range broadening, the potential becoming a way and a song. Many have fought this reality.We know the wounds, On the body of work and of heroes, and in all of us.Wounds of our green belief; Many have seen in the growing of their lives that dwarfing wound, the starving out of their chances by the rigid, who have no hope but the static, the dead fact and size, Not the strength that we laugh in beginning, the pleasure moving toward unknown making; but hard control, clanging of doors closing like burial, the signals of wreck  Deforming the children in the galleries of coal, deforming the woman in her pride of home, deforming us in our dream and in bed and as we look in one another's faces, Seeing the terrible still poem. Into this time Vision sails.In the midland, thinking of ocean, Among constraint, brooding on our long hope, That hope in distinctness rides, full of our powers. Riding in light Into the movement of our bodies, into our words, In all we love.
The woods stretch deep to the mountain side, And the brush is wild where a man may hide. They have brought the bloodhounds up again To the roadside rock where they found the slain. They have brought the bloodhounds up, and they Have taken the trail to the mountain way. Three times they circled the trail and crossed, And thrice they found it and thrice they lost. Now straight through the trees and the under-brush They follow the scent through the forest's hush. And their deep-mouthed bay is a pulse of fear In the heart of the wood that the man must hear. The man who crouches among the trees From the stern-faced men who follow these. A huddle of rocks that the ooze has mossed And the trail of the hunted again is lost. An upturned pebble, a bit of ground A heel has trampled the trail is found. And the woods re&euml;cho the bloodhounds' bay As again they take to the mountain way. A rock, a ribbon of road, a ledge, With a pine tree clutching its crumbling edge. A pine, that the lightning long since clave, Whose huge roots hollow a ragged cave. A shout, a curse, and a face aghast, And the human quarry is laired at last. The human quarry with clay-clogged hair And eyes of terror who waits them there. That glares and crouches and rising then Hurls clods and curses at dogs and men. Until the blow of a gun-butt lays Him stunned and bleeding upon his face. A rope; a prayer; and an oak-tree near, And a score of hands to swing him clear. A grim, black thing for the setting sun And the moon and the stars to look upon.
   With stealthy, terrible swiftness, Darted one of the branded, life beating in every vein;  Freedom stirring his pulses,  Gladness and fear and longing Surging thro' brain and body with precious unwonted pain.  Out from the damp, dark cell,  The shackles, the sorrowful silence, Out from the ring of faces and the jarring of stern commands,  Forth to the scent of the meadows,  The glisten of garrulous brooklets, And the dim, kindly evening he blessed with his weary hands.  On, like the sweep of a scimitar  Dashed he, cutting the darkness, Or as the storm blows on, none knowing its way or its will;  Cumbered with horrible fears,  Leaped he the perilous ledges Reaching the village that lay in the valley, untroubled and still.  Midway of his sickening haste,  Sudden he faltered and moaned, Seeing three stand by a window, as the breeze loitering blew;  A woman sad-featured and patient,  Two golden heads at her shoulder, Dear eyes he made shine once dear childish hair that he knew!  Not yet, for surely the bloodhounds  Would track him thither to-morrow; Not yet! tho' soon that door should open, as long ago:  Dashing the tear from his cheeks,  The bronze, rough cheeks that it hallowed, He rushed on. Had they seen it, the poor, wan face? Did they know?  Here meet the roads: see, eastways,  The long, clear track to the forest, There, with chestnuts shaded, the path to the inland town:  Behind, a glimpse of the village,  Front four sharp cliffs to the ocean; Quickly, which shall he choose? Hark! the captors are hunting him down!  Shuffle of hurrying feet,  Breathings nearer and nearer. No choice for a man that is doomed, unless straight to the merciful sea.  Up to the toilsome cliffs!  Better death than new anguish! A cry, a plunge ... shine, stars, on the ripples that ring that sea. Soft in the ominous shadow the branches stir by the meadow, Fair in the lonely distance the dying household glow;  Deep in the dust of the street,  Just where the four roads meet, Two trembling forms where he stood a moment so;  And a wistful child's voice said,  Touched with great trouble and dread: &ldquo;O little sister! which way did father go?&rdquo;
Poor Myrtle would sigh, &ldquo;Sweet my Coz, The  Putting Egg in your Shoe And then making Goo, Which, with Slobbers and Snorts, You drink up in Quarts; And that Gravy and Fat All over your Hat,  How  When you Slurp and go, Poof! The Cat runs for a Roof Clear under the Chair; And your Friends, how they Stare! The Mere Mention of Soups Makes them Huddle in Groups,  And they'll soon stay away in Great Bunches!&rdquo;
Returning to all the unsaid all the lost living untranslated in any sense, and the dead unrecognized, celebrated only in dreams that die by morning is a mourning or ghostwalking only. You must make, said music in its voices of metal and wood in its dancing diagrams, moving apart and together, along and over and under a line and speaking in one voice, make my image.Let be what is gone.
<> Batting the screen of a strange summer morning Make the house laugh; the little lakes crinkle Pressed by the breeze that brooms the highway clean. The midnight traveler was the most distinct, Whom clouds of maples and late rising stars Guided, huge baby, to his rickety home. His motor sighed, shut off under the window, And then his footstep, creaking, and his groan Made a disclosure I cannot remember. It might have been a void, a wandering name, A tanner, skinner, hooper, waggoner, Jack of all trades jackboot, jackknife or jack  Or bloodshot son of grand O'Rahilly; Sodbuster's it might be, or sledgeman's son That from the Adriatic's golden breast Climbed the black hull in hunger; voyageur, Porteur, or habitant; or mountain man His ancient father was, who poled the rivers, Trapped the fox, and saw the dusk of bison Grazing on plains of light, or the cold pine Pillar in the aurora's winter stream. The late cars on the road and crossing whistles, Both near and far, were that man's requiem. At his bedside and feet the starlit rails And wires wet with dew sang of his cities, Before dim earth asleep had cabined him, And cabined him in me. Gone on the grey Dawngloaming road against the smoking East, To drowse with sun-up in some distant town  Not a soul here heard the man so early.
The blood we give the dead to drink is deeds we do at the will of the dead spirits in us, not our own live will. The dead who thirst to speak had no good of words or deeds when they lived, or not enough, and were left in longing. Their longing to speak, their thirst for the blood of their deeds done by us, would leave no time, place, force, for our own deeds, our own imagination of speech. Refuse them! If we too miss out, don't create our lives, invent our deeds, do them, dance a tune with our own feet, we shall thirst in Hades, in the blood of our children.
O land alive with miracles! O clad in streams, Countering the silver summer's pleasant arrows And beating them with the kind armor Of your enkindled water-vesture, Lift your blue trees into the early sun! O country wild with talent Is there an hour in you that does not rouse our mind with songs? The boughs that bend in the weak wind Open us momentary windows, here and there, Into those deep and purple galleries, Disclosing us the birds your genius; And yet the earth is loud With more than this their timid vaudeville. O brilliant wood! Yours is the voice of a new world; And all the hills burn with such blinding art That Christ and angels walk among us, everywhere. These are their ways, their fiery footsteps, That flash and vanish, smile and pass;  By those bright passengers our groves are all inspired. Lo, we have seen you, we have seized you, wonder, Caught you, half held you in the larch and lighted birch: But in that capture you have sailed us half-mile-high into the air To taste the silences of the inimitable hawk: Nor do we swing upon the wind To scan the flattened barns as brown as blood Growing into the surface of the wounded earth, Or learn the white roads, livid as a whipcut scar. For suddenly we have forgotten your geography, Old nature, and your map of prey, And know no more the low world scourged with travelling. The genuine steps, the obvious degrees The measured cart-ways and the fields we trod all day And the tunes of the clattering shops, Even the songs that crowned the highest hill Find us no longer beggars for their petty coin. We've left the stations of the mendicants And the ways of the workaday saints. But in the dazzled, high and unelectric air Seized in the talons of the terrible Dove, The huge, unwounding Spirit, We suddenly escape the drag of earth Fly from the dizzy paw of gravity And swimming in the wind that lies beyond the track Of thought and genius and of desire, Trample the white, appalling stratosphere.
I knew a woman, lovely in her bones, When small birds sighed, she would sigh back at them; Ah, when she moved, she moved more ways than one: The shapes a bright container can contain! Of her choice virtues only gods should speak, Or English poets who grew up on Greek (I'd have them sing in chorus, cheek to cheek). How well her wishes went! She stroked my chin, She taught me Turn, and Counter-turn, and Stand; She taught me Touch, that undulant white skin; I nibbled meekly from her proffered hand; She was the sickle; I, poor I, the rake, Coming behind her for her pretty sake (But what prodigious mowing we did make). Love likes a gander, and adores a goose: Her full lips pursed, the errant note to seize, She played it quick, she played it light and loose; My eyes, they dazzled at her flowing knees; Her several parts could keep a pure repose, Or one hip quiver with a mobile nose (She moved in circles, and those circles moved). Let seed be grass, and grass turn into hay: I'm martyr to a motion not my own; What's freedom for? To know eternity. I swear she cast a shadow white as stone. But who would count eternity in days? These old bones live to learn her wanton ways: (I measure time by how a body sways).
The sky is gray and it will be raining soon and we're waiting in line for the drive-in, the one on Eight Mile, the border between Detroit and Warren and the anger is stewing just like always, every day guns pointed at our own dumb heads, every day somebody else dumb enough to pull the trigger because we're mad, mad and sick and dumb and we're gonna get ourselves a little piece of something even if it means taking it away from someone else who don't have much, or else we're sick and tired of everybody taking, so we're gonna protect ourselves, by god, though god don't seem to help much here he's getting ripped off too and we all want to have our say one way or another, so there's a lot of guns in a lot of hands, yes, I'm thinking all this here as it starts to pour, fucking rain like crazy, and I say  business, just like I carry a gun, so it's fucking raining and if you don't like it then fucking get lost because I'm still going to the movies a Clint triple-header  <> and all these good, bad, ugly people are leaning on their horns and some asshole cuts his car into the line up front and this big fat guy gets out of his car and runs up to that car and he's screaming  he means business, and he's pounding on the windows yanking on the door, and he's getting soaked, but he don't give a fuck, he is me and he is you, and the guy in the car is me and you and we're all kicking each other's asses while the bosses are safe and dry in Grosse Pointe or West Bloomfield or wherever the fuck they live, laughing at  and thinking Woody fucking Allen is a genius, let me tell you, Clint ain't no genius, but I understand his movies, and I understand what's going on up ahead, and I'm hearing sirens, and me and you, we're in this together, buddy, just a couple dummies like those two up there, and nobody's letting us in and nobody's getting out, and it's only a matter of time till somebody pulls a gun.
Noah retrieves the dove again,  Which bears him in its bill A twig of olive to explain That, if God sends them no more rain,  The world may prosper still. Shem, Ham and Japheth raise a shout,  But weeks on end must wait Till Father Noah, venturing out, Can view the landscape all about  And prophesy their fate. &lsquo;Where have the waters of God's Flood  Dispersed?&rsquo; God only knew. What Noah saw was miles of mud, Drowned rogues, and almond trees in bud  With blossom peeping through. &lsquo;Bold lads, in patience here abide!  This mire around the ark By wind or sun must well be dried Before we set against her side  The planks to disembark.&rsquo; Obedient sons, a virtuous wife,  Flocks, cattle, jars of seeds, Crook, coulter, halter, pruning-knife  Noah forecasts a brave new life  Agreeable to his needs. Exult with him at the clear sky,  Proud Noahs of today, For though we here and there descry Morasses that no sun can dry  (Regret them how we may), God's rainbow is a glorious toy,  His wine a cheerful drink, And since He chooses to destroy Folk better dead, we wish Him joy,  While choking at the stink.
In herds you slither about the town: these are comfortable moments for your mangled gathering. How proudly you wear your mange. It is the prime mover of your awkward step. Even the streetlights shy away from the love you have for those less recognizably human than yourself. When alone, you keep the corners of the world; and, when at last relaxed there, your pink, scarred paws explore your broken parts. No one to ask you now what beauty means to you, just how much of it you have to offer others.
Winter false dawns woke me:  Lorries loaded with chipped ice and not quite four! Felt-swathed babushkas stooping to chip more  Leningrad's vast pool of widowhood, who also guard the Rembrandts and rank Gents, who stand all day with stern unbending gaze haloed with Tsars' crowns and Faberg&eacute;s, their menfolk melted down to monuments. It's their eyes make me shy I've fallen for a woman who they'd chorus at  and make me edgy walking here with you between the statues VERITAS, HONOR, and PSYCHE whom strong passion made forget conditions of darkness and the gods' taboo.
<> Thou wert sometime the garden of a king. The birds have sought a lovelier place to sing. The flowers are few. It was not so of old. It was not thus when hand in hand there strolled Through arbors perfumed with undying Spring Bare bodies beautiful, brown, glistening, Decked with green plumes and rings of yellow gold. Do you suppose the herdsman sometimes hears Vague echoes borne beneath the moon's pale ray From those old, old, far-off, forgotten years? Who knows? Here where his ancient kings held sway He stands. Their names are strangers to his ears. Even their memory has passed away.
Of longing, Termia, the sharp specifics know no end, and down its progress the sharp days lose no edge, the hours crumbling streambeds to strand the source deeper in summer. Orchard ladders lean into the moist sheen of dark globes. Near Baden under swallows, one belltower cut through vineyards, banners out, when the wish fixed me, rash as blind archery, to lift one clean impulse streaking out of the ruck even if it landed wide of your touch while quarter-hour strokes through worn maroon face rings rounded on their gold mark.  Slow tones, swelling things to a lightness but if that shivered me, it wasn't from forgetting how separateness the cold angel converts us to our fixities, nor from denying she turns each of us in her fire like hickory seasoned for a torch, nor from ceasing to share in her trade of thrust, chill, thrust, the injustices giving and taking justice in good time, no one shouts the recognition, it will not cry out in us, yet they rang out, bronze minutes, the bronze years, with blunt frayed rope those changes threading the spin of one swallow who still climbed slabs of vapor thickening over vine and crest, then targeted down through harvest, his poverty with ours uncancelled yet his riches plunging, sounding there while bolted counterweights thudding inside their dry tower argued you could not hear, and claimed no one could tell you how they made medley, before the orisons of Roman candles and rocket wails broke from streets below: Unification Eve.
O race that C&aelig;sar knew, That won stern Roman praise, What land not envies you The laurel of these days? You built your cities rich Around each towered hall,  Without, the statued niche, Within, the pictured wall. Your ship-thronged wharves, your marts With gorgeous Venice vied. Peace and her famous arts Were yours: though tide on tide Of Europe's battle scourged Black field and reddened soil, From blood and smoke emerged Peace and her fruitful toil. Yet when the challenge rang, &ldquo;The War-Lord comes; give room!&rdquo; Fearless to arms you sprang Against the odds of doom. Like your own Damian Who sought that lepers' isle To die a simple man For men with tranquil smile, So strong in faith you dared Defy the giant, scorn Ignobly to be spared, Though trampled, spoiled, and torn, And in your faith arose And smote, and smote again, Till those astonished foes Reeled from their mounds of slain, The faith that the free soul, Untaught by force to quail, Through fire and dirge and dole Prevails and shall prevail. Still for your frontier stands The host that knew no dread, Your little, stubborn land's Nameless, immortal dead.
<> Bring me no honeysuckle vine. The pang Of beauty that must die, yet ever grows More beautiful in dying, when the fang Of dissolution shall assail the heart, Is sacrifice too poignant. Do not ask it. Let beauty be eternal, and apart. Cherish immortal flowers for your basket, That need not die for gathering. Who knows What may have been the reason for that vine? Leave to the bee the liquor of his rose, For human lips too highly spiced a wine. Repent too late, and things which were immortal Are gone for garlanding an earthly portal.
Hearing offstage the taps filling the bath The set dissolves to childhood in her cot Hearing that ominous relentless noise Which the grown-ups have started, who are not, She knows, aware of what it means; it means The Dark, the Flood, the Malice. It destroys All other meanings dolls or gingerbread; It means a Will that wills all children dead. Hearing the gasfire breathe monotonously She waits for words but no words come, she lifts A soapstone hand to smooth her hair and feels The hand is someone else's the scene shifts To a cold desert where the wind has dropped And the earth's movement stopped and something steals Up from the grit through nerve and bone and vein To flaunt its iron tendrils in her brain. Hearing again the telegraph wires again Humming again and always, she must lean Against the humming post and search her mind For what it is they say; in some latrine She knows she wrote it first upon the wall In self-incrimination, duly signed; And, unrevoked since then, that signature Runs round the world on wires, accusing her. Hearing the church-bells too, she knows at once That only she can hear them for it is no Church or even belfry where they hang, There are no ropes attached or ringers down below, These bells are disembodied, they express The claims of frozen Chaos and will clang Till this and every other world shall melt And Chaos be Itself and nothing felt. Lastly, hearing the cock in the grey dawn Crow once, crow twice, she shivers and dissolves To someone else who in the hour of trial Denied his Master and his guilt devolves On her head only. If she could speak up, She might even now atone for that denial But the grey cock still crows and she knows why; For she must still deny, deny, deny.
Deep in the air the past appears As unreal as air to the boy Or the apple of the world To a girl whose eyes are pale and mild Her hair is probably not real gold Only a very good imitation of the Greeks' Like a map of that world of early days Where woman lives on a scarlet cloud While man in colorless blunt noon Splashes up at the blue variables That pass by on an airplane of words Into the sky which distributes gifts of Rain and light over our lives equally Infinite gifts we are unable to behold
Beside her, she a limpid brook, I took what nature salted in, delight what she so certainly at her mixed table meant we might, so quickly, when she gives when she enables one of her spring instruments to give what I, or any man or woman, must so surely and so lightly seize The gross, against which now is only claritas, was wimpled off, as, on that grass, her skin which I had known to fall by winter pain to scale was grace And her fine running a rune-ing of such songs my stones are groundings for If on this afternoon of spring the air was gently confident, And she extraordinarily clear if, here, outside, my lady was so sure, so obviously tender, and self-resting If in this slow mistral, so balancing she wore as queen of sedge the fragrance of the grass, of hay of love, of oats, of barley and of pease if on this green, the more made green by rain, And by her own soft self-ing If her own quiet so not made rotted by too close a keeping if by such clear-kept secret is her head so finely rising, is articulate her arms, her legs, their longing If in such silver coursing, these And her hips, as waters press against all margins, weave And if they now wear all themselves as coronal, then, boy, you have all the joy of that far intimate which lies, not as the trinkling waters of this brook where she began, but flood will be where she is consummate
Inkling of might-be far beyond our reach, Thou better than our best that we still need Yet drop tears on a buried tardy seed. .. O Unevolved! Vision eluding speech! Glory in darkness! Multitude in each .. For men in man mown down, disabled, bleed; So in himself, first, each must heal and feed The hurt and hungry who for help beseech! Spirit divine with gentleness and youth, Cover our barren centuries with shame For perfect never done nor made, and neared So rarely .. help our hearts confess the truth Yet not despair of rapture .. nor that flame Shall fuse till we of sullen dross be cleared.
Young wives enjoy the statutory right To slam the door, whether by day or night; Young husbands, too, are privileged to spend Long hours in bars, each with a chosen friend. But tell me can such independence prove More than a simple lack of love, More than a simple lack of love? O how can you regain Love lost on honeymoon in sunny Spain? Or though the nuptial contract, that deters Adulteresses and adulterers, May sweetly mortalize the venial sin Of beach flirtation after too much gin, Can such experiments in marriage prove More than a simple lack of love, More than a simple lack of love? O how can you regain Love lost on honeymoon in sunny Spain? And if your  Should end with corpses tossing in the sea, Both of you having sworn in hell's despite Never to panic or break off the fight, Can such heroic beach-head battles prove More than a simple lack of love, More than a simple lack of love? O how can you regain Love lost on honeymoon in sunny Spain?
We've sent our little Cupids all ashore   They were frightened, they were tired, they were cold. Our sails of silk and purple go to store,  And we've cut away our mast of beaten gold. (Foul weather!) Oh, 'tis hemp and singing pine for to stand against the brine,  But Love he is our master as of old! The sea has shorn our galleries away,  The salt has soiled our gilding past remede; Our paint is flaked and blistered by the spray,  Our sides are half a fathom furred in weed. (Foul weather!) And the Doves of Venus fled and the petrels came instead,  But Love he was our master at our need! 'Was Youth would keep no vigil at the bow,  'Was Pleasure at the helm too drunk to steer  We've shipped three able quartermasters now.  Men call them Custom, Reverence, and Fear. (Foul weather!) They are old and scarred and plain, but we'll run no risk again  From any Port o' Paphos mutineer! We seek no more the tempest for delight,  We skirt no more the indraught and the shoal  We ask no more of any day or night  Than to come with least adventure to our goal. (Foul weather!) What we find we needs must brook, but we do not go to look  Nor tempt the Lord our God that saved us whole. Yet, caring so, not overmuch we care  To brace and trim for every foolish blast, If the squall be pleased to sweep us unaware,  He may bellow off to leeward like the last. (Foul weather!) We will blame it on the deep (for the watch must have their sleep),  And Love can come and wake us when 'tis past. Oh, launch them down with music from the beach,  Oh, warp them out with garlands from the quays  Most resolute a damsel unto each   New prows that seek the old Hesperides! (Foul weather!) Though we know their voyage is vain, yet we see our path again  In the saffroned bridesails scenting all the seas! (Foul weather!)
<>  Are stirred in rhythm of large winds that bear  A mute divinity of human prayer  And human sorrow that the prayer is vain. The tears of speech that wet thy lips profane  No Muse with discord, for the world's control  Had never blurred the windows of thy soul  Nor bound the beating of thy heart with chain. But we have piled the gates of sun with dust,  And in the jangling darkness of the earth,  With muffled hearts, exist because we must. Our times are blasphemous: no tears, no shame,  But heaven insulted with an evil mirth  And greed exalted with a sacred name.
The teenage refugees trekked between the Amex office and the harbour bar, where Punch performed at noon and dusk: boozy burlesque; he'd empty the place with his tales and his wide eyes. A voice from a cloud, he said, from stones, from the sea, from deep in the hillside's clutter of caves. <> <> <> one boy his girlfriend, spread in a vineyard, slammed across a rock, her back broken by rabid passion; to the girl he showed the body of the boy on the goat-path near their tent and the swarm of ants at his opened throat. Old Punch in drink tends to stop at nothing. Next morning, he strode through the waves up to his waist and spread his fingers beneath the suds of backwash; tiny fish nibbled at the joints and fluttered fan-like across the buckle on his belt. You only have to look out with the land behind you to become touchless. The sun like a cauldron on his shoulder signalled from mirrors in the sea. He wanted to be drawn alive into its dense, white heart; to be part of the endless eruption that women flock to with their oils and their flesh, to be changed.
Whippoorwill beckoning in winter from nowhere's glade By first stars' shoreward tether to this darkling gulf Release your unchained streaming nightshade lanterns Looking out upon the white race tracks toward Arcturus To handicap the pain of several animal eternities Dear worlds I've never known nor ever will I hear your soprano sax sounds floating seaward And in them an angel on one shoulder sighing Like a diamond or a cry to guide and reconcile The time wandering inmate to this bone asylum Through winter twilight's glowing exact cold A thin wash of gray water color is bleeding As traffic slowly hones the blade of evening And scatters its eyes across dusk's drift and growth Muffled lamps lighting up only the bearers
Walls were painted blue so long ago, you think of old sky you thought lovely turned as it did, in your lifetime, dirty. Six crude wood tables and the pregnant cat seem permanent on the pockmarked concrete floor. The owner gives too much away, too much free wine and from his eyes too much grief. His facial lines amplify in light the two small windows and the opaque door glass flatten out. To enter you should be poor by consent. You and the world that hurts you should agree you don't deserve a penny. Nor a clear tongue to beg sympathy from wine dark as your life and rich as your dream you still are nothing in. And you should agree to cross your throat and weep when the casket passes. You should kneel when wind crosses the olive grove in waves of stuttering coin. At nine the light goes down. You weave home to homes you'll never own. Only men in broken rags come back to drink black wine under the painting Moonlight on Sea a drunk thought lovely  turned as it did, in his liftime, muddy. You hear the wind outside turn white. Wasn't some loud promise in another wine? Sea cliff with a girl, her hair streamed out your lifetime down the sky? Your wine is dead. Tomorrow you'll return to this grim charm, not quite broken, not quite ready to release your eyes.
<> <> the only cool day of summer kids at bullfights yellow and purple green olives under an almond tree a trapezoid smile indoors without a flash two aunts and an uncle avocado vinaigrette a bath with no hot water a spoon and a fork illuminated hands of a clock on its side the hidden side of an arriving train Paris at night a face appearing at different windows of a big house the last half of April and the first of May one other A gram. How much? Are you married? Yes. Is she? Of course. Where are your men? My husband is arriving later. Will he let you go? Of course. Where are we going? I will meet you here at 4 o'clock. How much? He will let you go? 4 o'clock.
timeless ly this (merely and whose not numerable leaves are fall i ng)he StandS lift ing against the shrieking sky such one ness as con founds all itcreating winds
We call your silent mother, buried in the watchful belt undoing her poisoned waters: we must blame whatever it speaks to her image, whitened in a Finnish calm; to your dark father gone home in uniform, your grey eyes sparkling in the candles of your mother's apron, is your dark father's hair, and it curls necklength on the windpipe where you can't go home. This spigot where you hang drips on her sugared apron: now you can go home, and your father is the carpenter who left you not in the box that carried your body home to Detroit, and your mother is not at the door of this Inn: and as you scream it is not primal and the race split down the twin circling roads on whitened family have no beds, and this is a hotel where you told me this inn-counter.
When England's hot near Gretton, hollows hold up rings of blowflies and the noise of all those dreary passions that blow like orchestras inside ambitious men. Having for their history a fiddler's jig the hollows here distil, by Deene and Laxton, varnish, that bumps from the yellow ears down to the white stalks of wheat. Golden Syrup in hot water; when England's hot clipped hedges' roots lift, roses smell of anaesthetic and make the air blear. So landscapes make pictures, not a county, and man, locked in his Hall, miles from London happily is stopped in a hollow, anchored with ornaments, delivered through its doors by chemistry and not desire. Staffords and Hattons are not so still; and they are  obliged to breathe and not play, the instruments are uninspired and burn invention to the top, dry as scarlet fever, in a hot depression still held by summer and no promise.
Climbed uphill to the seashore summerhouse, Domed and shingled cottage occupied By certain predecessors in whose pots Our porridge bubbles merrily. The waves Crash beyond the windows. Without ceremony They pack their things and are about to go. Well, we will soon forget them walking Dourly without shadows two by two. It's our vacation, sheets dried in the sun  Out from the floorboard, underneath the bed With slightest scrape of scale on wooden grain The flattened head of a silent copperhead  A kitchen cleaver leaps into my hand, Shining through the high song of your fear The whacking silver arc of light descends And head rolls, chomping, and the lithe And lovely diamonds down the back writhe. He, he, tall, returns, removes A curved and grooved tooth and squeezes it Into my palm. &lsquo;Here, it's yours now.&rsquo; &lsquo;Thanks, But might I not, as a memento, keep The head?&rsquo; &lsquo;Oh no, there's poison in the fangs.&rsquo; And now he's dropped the snake 'into his thermos Of iced tea (&lsquo;The place is yours&rsquo;) and driven Down the sinuous twisting distant road. And we've the sunny, salty, freshened air And wind-dried linen sheets to spread.
Through dawn in February's wincing radiance, every splinter of river mist rayed in my eyes. As if the squint of the sun had released light's metals. As if the river pulsed white, and the holly's sharp green lacquered leaves leaped acetylene. As if the air smouldered from the ice of dry pain, as if day were fragmented in doubt. As if it were given to enter alive the braided rings Saturn is known by and yet be allied to the dyke's heaped mud. I will not forget how the ash trees stood, silvered and still, how each soft stone on its near shadow knelt, how the sheep became stones where they built their pearled hill.
Beneath the fabric of leaves, sycamore, beech, black oak, in the slow residual movement of the pool; in the current braiding over the wedged branch, and pouring from the ledge, urgent, lyric, the source marshalls every motion to the geometric plunder of rock  arranging a socket of water, a cold estate where the muscle wound in the deep remission of light waits for the white enamel dipper, the last release, the rush, the blunt completion
Here by the fire, in his favorite chair, he waited the coming of the Age of Spirit with his friend, the philosopher, as his wife stitched by the oil lamp on the oak table and rain fell harder in the spring dusk that darkened the wide window looking west. He could, from this vantage, see far out over the lake where the sun blazed through clouds in a stupendous arrival of light just before it set behind the head of his friend, who was once more confessing the sin of doubt, his huge brow bent helpless under shame. The poet explained once more how all the signs promised the Great Coming, but this time his voice had in it something that made his wife look up from her needle It was the rain, she thought, and the waiting and him so easily cast down, but these were good times and there was tea. Meanwhile, as summer swelled, the revolution across the water became a bloody angel, and one day his dearest sister stiffened into wild silence, and then, also, his friend, the philosopher, began drinking too much, showing up in tears, his clothes filthy. But visitors found the poet happy to tell them the newer truth: that each must release the Spirit within, though his wife could see that when he looked beyond them west, he looked at nothing special, and she could feel the pain of his favorite chair as he sat himself deeper and deeper in it.
I have come back. I command my Palatine stable open. Punctilious German grooms lumber forward to quiet my varnished hooves, while a youth I have trained to keep me amused with our daily game along the forums of playing at trampling down Barbarian burghers walks off stiffly to his rubdown, telling the others how deftly I scattered the coin when the toll gate keeper held out his till. My slaves' dull knives scrape my belly. The slave who steals oats for his supper soon now will whimper, &ldquo;My wife has grown old; but this Arabian mare!&rdquo; That always gives the signal for the other to make proud complaint how his Province pooled its labored days to honor Rome in my honor;  and that halfbreed stallion to whinny from the straw dark of the stall the unconsolating mysteries of my inviolate vagina.
Dark, drear, and drizzly, with vapor grizzly, The day goes dully unto its close; Its wet robe smutches each thing it touches, Its fingers sully and wreck the rose. Around the railing and garden-paling The dripping lily hangs low its head: A brood-mare whinnies; and hens and guineas Droop, damp and chilly, beneath the shed. In splashing mire about the byre The cattle huddle, the farm-hand plods; While to some neighbor's a wagon labors Through pool and puddle and clay that clods. The day, unsplendid, at last is ended, Is dead and buried, and night has come;  Night, blind and footless, and foul and fruitless, With weeping wearied, and sorrow-dumb. Ah, God! for thunder! for winds to sunder The clouds and o'er us smite rushing bars! And through wild masses of storm, that passes, Roll calm the chorus of moon and stars.
It is like my father, His legs turning to rubber, Taking what he believes to be His last look at our house. I imagine my mother, his Crazy wife, Standing at the front door, Believing it all an elaborate stunt, Or peeking through The living room blinds <> <> He breathes. The street reels under his feet, And now he is like an intoxicated dancer, Luck wheezing out of his mouth, Propped up by cousins Leading him to the open maw Of their car door Which becomes The line that marks The borders of the world as he knows it, The line which, once crossed, Is forever denied. My father Stops at that portal, And, though totally mistaken, Takes a hard look at his house. Everything the words  Meant to imply Is in this look, A look that, when shown to me later, Second-hand, As part of a story with a Happy ending, Nevertheless Raises the ante.
<> This was known to the Chaldeans long ago. And more: somebody wins whenever somebody loses. This too was in the savvy of the Chaldeans. They take it heaven's hereafter is an eternity of crap games where they try their wrists years and years and no police come with a wagon; the game goes on forever. The spots on the dice are the music signs of the songs of heaven here. God is Luck: Luck is God: we are all bones the High Thrower rolled: some are two spots, some double sixes. The myths are Phoebe, Little Joe, Big Dick. Hope runs high with a: Huh, seven huh, come seven This too was in the savvy of the Chaldeans.
There is a room where it is rare. It is a window or a door or a story coming across the water of when he was coming or he came. There is no harm in it except what you find there, I hid it between the fine strands of her hair teased almost silver. It was raining &amp; she carried unopened an umbrella. He was one of the just ones whose hopes had nothing to do with the night. Their worth works. Hard to say, but even when they sleep. She didnt see them, found herself under awning or marquee with a closed red umbrella wet in her hand. I have dreaded beauty all my days its power on me. How when her lover knocked plangent at her door she went on staring out the window, down of her cheek nibbled by the rough silk curtain beige or yellow. Then the banging stopped. There was no sound on the staircase so she wasnt sure he had actually gone till she saw him, in the usual Estonian scarf, turning out of the courtyard onto the street. There are always fewer subways where the rich live. Went later to the zoo where she watched seals. Their relationship to dogs. A photograph I certainly never saw. Sweet popcorn in boxes, smell of weasels. &ldquo;It is or isnt, I did let him go. There is no chance of his return.&rdquo; She lets it bring her home to the fireplace. The broad piano or the gull on the windowsill. Pigeon, of course. Anyone can sometimes forget. The fire was set for the rest of the night the way the damper was fixed. Her guess didnt really count. Even the phone ring she not to answer. Some verb she couldnt remember &amp; didnt do.
Something like the way this sentry plant stands so simply there It doesn't hiccup, it doesn't go bananas, it stands &amp; just grows thru centuries, no? thru rain &amp; drought as matters of course Maybe like bamboo it's really trying to tell us something Can you tune in its ecstatic frequency? Please, what is it saying?
<> To frolic and run in the sun-sweet hay: It's up and out with a laugh and shout  Let the old world know that a boy's about. It's ho for the creek that the minnows streak, That the sunbeams dapple, the cattle seek; For a fishing-pole and a swimming-hole, Where a boy can loaf and chat with his soul. It's oh to lie and look at the sky Through the roof of the leaves that's built so high: Where all day long the birds make song, And everything's right and nothing is wrong. It's hey to win where the breeze blows thin, And watch the twinkle of feather and fin: To lie all day and dream away The long, long hours as a boy's heart may. It's oh to talk with the trees and walk With the winds that whisper to flower and stalk: And it's oh to look in the open book Of your own boy-dreams in some leafy nook. Away from the noise of the town, and toys, To dream the dreams that are dreamed by boys: To run in the heat, with sun-tanned feet, To the music of youth in your heart's young beat. To splash and wade in the light and shade Of the league-long ripples the sunbeams braid: In boyhood's wise to see with eyes Of fancy hued as the butterflies. To walk for hours and learn the flowers, And things that haunt the woods and bowers: To climb to a nest on a tree's top crest, Where a bird, like your heart, is singing its best. To feel the rain on your face again, Like the thirsty throats that the flowers strain: To hear the call of the waterfall, Like the voice of youth, a wonder-thrall. And it's oh for me at last to see The rainbow's end by the hillside tree: On the wet hillside where the wild ferns hide, Like a boy's bright soul to see it glide. Then to laugh and run through shower and sun In the irised hues that are arched and spun: And, the rainbow's friend, to find and spend The bag of gold at the rainbow's end.
There's enough, dear children,  To do in the house, To keep you as busy  As a little mouse. There's enough, dear children,  To do all about, And if you will try, you will  Soon find it out. There's enough, dear children,  To do anywhere, So hurry around and  Do your full share. And children, whatever you  Do, do it well, People always, in looking it  Over, can tell. If mama and papa desire  You should work, Go at it cheerfully, don't  Grow up a shirk. When you are out with your  Playmates at play, Make it as merry as  Bird songs in May. And when you grow up to be  Women and men, You'll know how to overcome  Evil and sin. The future, the future just  Over the way, Is patiently looking for  A better day. Its hanging, dear children,  Upon your hand, And is ready to march  At your command. Therefore you are soldiers,  Captains and guards, Lead your playmates and be  Led by your God.
strength feels babieshow unconscious we are startling big men on the way they runthey can't walk fardecline the mountain grassjust look at starsknock-outs how slow is the distance the graves the strong green complicated productions the loudspeaker from the field covers the street the phone seemed too simple the old man's idea he wants to go there cutting the grass with gas leaves rising and falling in what winds
Sometimes one of the bigger girls in the sandpit would protect me from the tough kids, but never Doris Kuntz she'd beat me up herselfjust for being a sissy which insulted her idea of man. She didn't take shit from anybody. She was even tougher than her brother Billy who practiced goosestepping in the back fields where the German-American Bund held patriotic rallies around a flagpole set in cement, featuring swastikas, uniforms, and beer. Crying &ldquo;Viva La Bunza,&rdquo; he'd throw frogs into our campfires, and liked to remind the others I was a Jewboy as, grinning, he socked me casually in the belly and sent me home crying it was that easy. The Kuntzes were the kind that beat you up if they knew you couldn't fight back. It would be an easy win to add to their scores in life  Billy already had a sash full of merit badges for everything from building fires by rubbing sticks to signalling from hilltops with flags. Of the two, Doris was the survivor. You'd think he'd be a killer, but Billy got shot down in the South Pacific, and Sonny Hugg, his friend, though of a different breed  for Sonny, other people, and frogs, had a right to live  sentimental Sonny obtained special permission to search for Billy's plane in the jungle. Even back in the Depression, when my sister went out looking day after day, Doris was able to get a job as a secretary. That kind of nerve was what you needed, my mother said, with heavy irony. Her children who lacked it understood: there were two kinds of people and we were the other, like our parents, helpless before the Kuntzes of the world. With hindsight, though, Doris could as easily have gotten a job making lampshades at Acme Extermination, Herr Hitler, Proprietor.
<> Do you want affidavits? There's a man in the moon with money for you. Do you want affidavits? There are ten dancing girls in a sea-chamber off Nan- tucket waiting for you. There are tall candles in Timbuctoo burning penance for you. There are anything else? Speak now for now we stand amid the great wishing windows and the law says we are free to be wishing all this week at the windows. Shall I raise my right hand and swear to you in the monotone of a notary public? this is &ldquo;the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.&rdquo;
car stuck horn fine hour gone fast keeping things upwith scenes from every place one big sport is enough countless horizons green because of hills, trees, the wind has a slowness as it seems not too often it's a temperate zone and again i saw the west or wailing wall pulling a switch sleep all these sol d VWs you can't really track years
The program's on &ldquo;Bad Bogs,&rdquo; how to get out of if you're stuck in the outback how to get back on track, get your wheels unstuck and the rest of you too. It seems there are ways of pulling yourself out of quicksand, using nothing but a rope and your own ingenuity. (Who has a rope?) There are times when your engine has failed  when all you can do is fix up some shade and lie in it, careful not to use up any energy. (Who has energy?) There are times when shade of your hat's just a start. (Use mud on the rest of you.) There are times when a stick can dig you out, Man  out of the worst mess you ever got in. (Who's got a stick?) There are times, Mate, when a lizard's the best friend you've had, ever. (Who's had a friend?) There are times when you boil the swamp in your billy, find it's just fine. Look for nuggets, rattle your cup. Note that lizard's blue tongue. Send up some smoke. Next time, bring a C.B. Or don't go at all  not to the outback, not to the bush.
Old men looked back, the young forward. What did it matter in a round world? Love and truth kept their place on the horizon. The war that was won was for fighting again. As though their main hope was the electron men crowded a glass waiting for it to break out into a new orbit, ignoring the poet who, from the rope-trick of the language, called down like an angel stranded somewhere between earth and heaven.
Pat your foot and turn the corner. Nat Turner, dying wood of the church. Our lot is vacant. Bring the twisted myth of speech. The boards brown and falling away. The metal bannisters cheap and rattly. Clean new Sundays. We thought it possible to enter the way of the strongest. But it is rite that the world's ills erupt as our own. Right that we take our own specific look into the shapely blood of the heart. Looking thru trees the wicker statues blowing softly against the dusk. Looking thru dusk thru dark- ness. A clearing of stars and half-soft mud. The possibilities of music. First that it does exist. And that we do, in that scripture of rhythms. The earth, I mean the soil, as melody. The fit you need, the throes. To pick it up and cut away what does not singularly express. Need. Motive. The delay of language. A strength to be handled by giants. The possibilities of statement. I am saying, now, what my father could not remember to say. What my grandfather was killed for believing. Pay me off, savages. Build me an equitable human assertion. One that looks like a jungle, or one that looks like the cities of the West.But I provide the stock. The beasts and myths. The City's Rise! (And what is history, then? An old deaf lady burned to death in South Carolina.
Whence let us go to what is shared is nicest and begin Their holding hands leaves each aware of self and other Their touching skins breast to mouth mouth to breast their planting kisses in hair sunders uniting if he in her unmatched is by a her in him And when a pair bereft of day and movement into night are sunk how would it suit her her hell him or suit his will with his hell her What then is love for lovers mating with nought spoiled though all uprooted but completing natural skill forever giving him to her giving forever her to him for them joying in every difference love decrees
What they dreamed, Lying on filthy mattresses Was to bear witness, To tell, to make known, To sanctify horror By bringing it into the open world To be cleansed and purified By human tears ... Each survivor, a miracle, To be greeted like Lazarus Anointed and cherished. This is what kept them alive. A handful survived Holding the dream in their arms, But they learned When their mouths opened When they could speak at last, No one wished to hear, &ldquo;Don't tell me, it's too awful.&rdquo; Jew, gentile, all turned away. No one wanted Lazarus To rise from the dead. He was an embarrassment, Unwelcome reminder Of things best forgotten. They learned to be silent, Buried alive among the corpses As it had been in the beginning In the time of the holocaust.
My island by another week has drifted like a rusty wreck without a steersman. From the beach with hopeless eyes I watch her go. I would swim out to her but You have also put chains on my ankles. What, Father, do You mean by that? Yes, weariness and grief is a fair description of my life  I wonder if others are better off. I have also written, like now, these facts down and this has given me pride if not much joy. How wistfully I envy without hostility the young who race and breathe without thinking of death. I used to try to know them and made advances to them who now seem like a different species in the environment. In a panic and compelled as when once a devil held the knife to my heart and I had no choice but to obey. I was a child, I could not run away, my palms were cold and wet. Today but, Father of fugitives, I am old though my palms are wet and cold.
She is that guid tae me so she is an Am a burden tae her, I know Am ur. Stuck here in this big blastit bed year in, year oot, ony saint wuid complain. There's things she has tae dae fir me A' wish she didnae huv tae dae. Am her wean noo, wey ma great tent o' nappy, an champed egg in a cup, an mashed tattie. Aw the treats A' used tae gie her, she's gieing me. A' dinny ken whit happened. We dinny talk any mair. Whether it's jist the blethers ha been plucked oot o' us an Am here like some skinny chicken, ma skin aw bubbles and dots and spots, loose flap noo (an yet as a young wuman A' took pride in ma guid smooth skin.) Aw A' dae is sit an look oot this windae. A've seen hale generations graw up an simmer doon fray this same windae  that's no seen a lick o' paint fir donkeys. The Kerrs have disappeared, but the last Campbells ur still here so Am telt  tho' hauf the time A' dinny believe her: A've no seen ony Campbell in a lang time. My dochter says &lsquo;Awright mother?&rsquo; haunds me a thin broth or puried neep an A say &lsquo;Aye fine,&rsquo; an canny help the great heaving sigh that comes oot my auld loose lips, nor ma crabbit tut, nor ma froon when A' pu' ma cardie tight aroon ma shooders fir the night drawin in. Am jist biding time so am ur. Time is whit A' hauld between the soft bits o' ma thumbs, the skeleton underneath ma night goon; aw the while the glaring selfish moon lights up this drab wee prison. A'll be gone and how wull she feel? No that Am saying A' want her guilty. No that Am saying Am no grateful.
Uprose, uprose, the stony fields uprose, And every snail dipped toward me its pure horn. The sweet light met me as I walked toward A small voice calling from a drifting cloud. I was a finger pointing at the moon, At ease with joy, a self-enchanted man. Yet when I sighed, I stood outside my life, A leaf unaltered by the midnight scene, Part of a tree still dark, still, deathly still, Riding the air, a willow with its kind, Bearing its life and more, a double sound, Kin to the wind, and the bleak whistling rain. The willow with its bird grew loud, grew louder still. I could not bear its song, that altering With every shift of air, those beating wings, The lonely buzz behind my midnight eyes;  How deep the mother-root of that still cry! The present falls, the present falls away; How pure the motion of the rising day, The white sea widening on a farther shore. The bird, the beating bird, extending wings . Thus I endure this last pure stretch of joy, The dire dimension of a final thing.
My father said I could not do it, but all night I picked the peaches. The orchard was still, the canals ran steadily. I was a girl then, my chest its own walled garden. How many ladders to gather an orchard? I had only one and a long patience with lit hands and the looking of the stars which moved right through me the way the water moved through the canals with a voice that seemed to speak of this moonless gathering and those who had gathered before me. I put the peaches in the pond's cold water, all night up the ladder and down, all night my hands twisting fruit as if I were entering a thousand doors, all night my back a straight road to the sky. And then out of its own goodness, out of the far fields of the stars, the morning came, and inside me was the stillness a bell possesses just after it has been rung, before the metal begins to long again for the clapper's stroke. The light came over the orchard. The canals were silver and then were not, and the pond was could see as I laid the last peach in the water full of fish and eyes.
You made healing as you wanted us to make bread and poems. In your abrasive life of gifts, In the little ravine telling the life of the future When your science would be given to all, A broken smile. In the sun, speaking of the joining of nerve-endings, Make the wounds part of the well body. Make a healed life. You shouted, waving your hand with the last phalange Of the little finger missing, you whole man, &ldquo;Make it well!Make things accessible!&rdquo; He is a pollinating man.We are his seedlings. Marshak, I was your broken nerve-endings, You made your man-made bridges over the broken nerves. What did you do?Inspect potatoes, wait for passports, do your research, While the State Department lady was saying, &ldquo;Let him swim,&rdquo; While the chief who had the power to allow your uses To move, a proper use of plastic, a bridge across broken nerves Stopped you there (and asked me to marry him). Saying to you, Marshak, full of creation as the time Went deeper into war, and you to death: &ldquo;The war will be over before your work is ready.&rdquo;
This summer, most friends out of town and no wind playing flash and dazzle in the cottonwoods, music of the Clark Fork stale, I've gone back to the old ways of defeat, the softball field, familiar dust and thud, pitcher winging drops and rises, and wives, the beautiful wives in the stands, basic, used, screeching runners home, infants unattended in the dirt. A long triple sails into right center. Two men on. Shouts from dugout: go, Ron, go. Life is better run from. Distance to the fence, both foul lines and dead center, is displayed. I try to steal the tricky manager's signs. Is hit-and-run the pulling of the ear? The ump gives pitchers too much low inside. Injustice? Fraud? Ancient problems focus in the heat. Bad hop on routine grounder. Close play missed by the team you want to win. Players from the first game, high on beer, ride players in the field. Their laughter falls short of the wall. Under lights, the moths are momentary stars, and wives, the beautiful wives in the stands now take the interest they once feigned, oh, long ago, their marriage just begun, years of helping husbands feel important just begun, the scrimping, the anger brought home evenings from degrading jobs. This poem goes out to them. Is steal-of-home the touching of the heart? Last pitch. A soft fly. A can of corn the players say. Routine, like mornings, like the week. They shake hands on the mound. Nice grab on that shot to left. Good game. Good game. Dust rotates in their headlight beams. The wives, the beautiful wives are with their men.
The morning washed once more after a flood of dream. A spotted sun or a flock of starlings or the Russian Air Force shot down on the DEW Line: God has a tin ear large as any radar dish. The Bible is his only home, he is not a religious man, he doesn't know he lives there. Floods and nagging wives and too many children at once trying to get to the bathroom, these things will touch the best of us. His name is not really God, but he is blond. Once he knew the light of sun intimately; he lay on white rocks without pain, he watched goats graze on tiny blue flowers. His daughters did the work  he was a philosopher of sorts. He never dials the last digit of any phone number, no one ever answers. The earth will wash clean anyway like a white shirt on the line every morning.
This magic land of sun stars  all the hunger &amp; dung of mortal existence that once set me destroying myself in youthful heroism I bow to you for sending us in the form of eternal loans your brightest stars Yogis that dazzling sun of all Suns Vedanta, O beautiful rishi Vedas, clarity I craved all my darkness sought madly in my madness our ignorance the fathomlessness of which is well preserved I now know that you have suffered for reasons out of your past (my own included) but re-rising you send us lotuses &amp; to you for us please accept these inkling seeds of Thank You
I live with so little that what I lose, I lose. A particle goes and &lsquo;Woe is me!&rsquo; cries my soul. Like a river-bank, in vain I try to grasp the passing flow. One by one they knock against my breast and then they move away the waves. Whatever passes and what remains: if I could surrender all to you, then would nothing perish but everything awake in your resplendent greatness. In you are so many suns and moons: not a molecule, not an atom's lost. Will not my crumbs of lost jewels be at your feet?
Her suitcase wasn't in the car, it was back at the house. &ldquo;Everyone,&rdquo; he told her, &ldquo;above the age of twelve takes care of her own suitcase. I can't do everything for you.&rdquo; She said, &ldquo;You were loading the car,&rdquo; and proceeded to show that Milton was right:  <> He had already paid for the boat and a can of worms. She sat in the stern, he rowed. &ldquo;No,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;it's impossible. We have to go back and get your damned suitcase.&rdquo; &ldquo;No,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;I'll go back. You go on by yourself.&rdquo; Thus they in mutual accusation spent The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning, And of thir vain cont&eacute;st appear'd no end. Who would be so foolish as to argue that his marriage was ordained? It was an accident, like everything else. The one he could have truly loved may have been living in the next street, but things were arranged so they would never meet. All our lives depend on some object that has been misplaced: a handkerchief, a letter, a goddamned suitcase. At this point it began to rain. The lake seethed, the shore was invisible, they huddled in their raincoats. It stopped, and the sun shone. They had drifted close to a rock covered with purple rhododendrons. The water next to the boat was clear. You could see to the bottom, trout, a foot long, gliding between the reeds. He said, &ldquo;We'll go back to the house, and start again. We've lost a day... I don't suppose it makes so much difference.&rdquo;
The wrecked horn of the body and a water voice The horn of the body and a slanted water voice The notes against the gate and the erasures at the gate The mineral swimmers fixed in a stone's milk and the doorways of our disappearing Whose night-songs and bridges and prisms are these Whose evens and odds cats on high limbs scorpions and swallows What figures within the coil tortoise and Bennu bird lotus and hawk palette plus ink-pot
Surely he'd outwitted them, outdistanced them and earned Respite at this caf&eacute;. There goes the ferry. Two trips risked in his own person, over And back, and now, in this wig Crossed again. Nobody knew him. Coffee under the arbor, mission done, Content. And then he recognized The first signs  Heat, hotter than the day's heat, swarming And his skin parched, stretching Tight about each finger; the eyes Pounding: arbor, harbor, Table, gable, all begin to swing Up and forth, forth and up, up and so, until Giddily earth grinds beneath him, shudders; Sweat oozes icy on his neck now, On shaking chest a shirt of seaweed crawls, Iron table rat-tat-tat-tat-tats against his elbow Though harbor's calm and arbor's still. You've seen A stepped-on centipede left on the pavement, Each limb's oracular gesticulations?  Cutting through the scent of pear trees Klaxons, baying, toil up up the highroad, Vans of his other pursuers.
What is most difficult is to believe: I say what is most difficult is to believe: When the sun rises in the low, hard grass What is most difficult is to believe: When moon comes night-certain to the lake What is most difficult is to believe: That Black children gather a dream in their arms and set that dream like a voice in their heads: a vision so perfect, so inviolable a man might wade through centuries with an undeniable reverence, a love: What is most difficult is to believe: And son and daughter once were son and daughter are son and daughter: What is most difficult is to believe: And Black people shall see sun forever, the world inexhaustible, the possibilities infinite like a Joshua tree or jazz: What is most difficult is to believe, I say: What is most difficult is to believe: And believe we did as the world urged us onward to shine, shout, our music the only truth in this dead, forgotten city.
The temple priests though using but one sign For TREE, distinguish poplar, oak and pine: Oak, short and spreading poplar, tall and thin  Pine, tall, bunched at the top and well inked in. Therefore in priestly thought all various trees Must be enrolled, in kind, as one of these. The fir, the cedar and the deodar Are pines, so too the desert palm-trees are; Aspens and birches are of poplar folk But chestnut, damson, elm and fig are oak. All might be simple, did the priests allow That apple-blossom dresses the oak bough, That dates are pines-cones; but they will not so, Well taught how pine and oak and poplar grow: In every temple-court, for all to see Flourishes one example of each tree In tricunx. Your high-priest would laugh to think Of oak boughs blossoming in pagan pink, Or numerous cones, hung from a single spine, Sticky yet sweeter than the fruit of vine, (For vine's no tree; vine is a creeping thing, Cousin to snake, that with its juice can sting). Confront your priest with evident apple-blossom; Will faith and doubt, conflicting, heave his bosom? Force dates between his lips, will he forget That there's no date-palm in the alphabet? Turn apostate? Even in secret? No, He'll see the blossom as mere mistletoe. The dates will be as grapes, good for his needs: He'll swallow down their stones like little seeds. And here's no lie, no hypocritic sham: Believe him earnest-minded as I am. His script has less, and mine more, characters Than stand in use with lexicographers. They end with palm, I see and use the sign For tree that is to palm as palm to pine, As apple-bough to oak-bough in the spring: It is no secrecy but a long looking.
<>  Skies of supreme adventure, lightning-crossed!  Tho', as we soar alone, perchance, and lost,  Strange ethers yield beneath our desperate wings, The diapason of Life's singing strings,  Large as the pensive murmur of still seas,  May reach us, and of all Truth's galaxies  Haply one star console our sufferings. We stand, at least, too far beyond to heed  The protest vacant and grandiloquent  Of timid, rich and pious men: the event Is ours to win or lose, and ours the faith  That he who sows the Truth's immortal seed  Shall harvest in the fields of life and death!
Where was it. Here before we knew it leaves champion'd the trees, shadows turned from, we were noon &amp; never knew it any more than the numbers mean. There was a quiet place &amp; a leaf bitten through, the sun saw through it, we reclaimed the order of our days, knew it was light when the dark went out. It was a matter of certain roads, rabbits at dusk, possums, a fox. But now what is it? Something no picture shows, the clock run down &amp; time still bold as a wolf &amp; beautiful. There is an island 30 acres broad, gulls live there &amp; why should we suppose we ever left or that place is not this where nothing asks itself of us but us?
When I die there'll be evidence such as this of a life, everything, all of it, arranged for effect, and only true if believed to be true, and no matter how sad a few people might feel, I know joy will be holding out in some muscled corner of their hearts, the sky will simply darken at the proper time while the light will be blinding elsewhere, in another language.
your words drift at the level of faces the language subtle moves like eyes to the tree outside of window and you are talking of Richard Wright to the trees to the ageless bark to an oak that by its own green profusion cannot be hidden and your eyes never drift to the lowest as some have who have been called beggars because they could not count on trees could not count on the undoing of what had been done so well by faces and your eyes motion again to the highest warp in the ceiling to the place of fields not France and Germany where Wright gave and was taken listen to his soul listen to his soul listen to his doleful soul Outsider(out/side/her) but freedom is defined from within we know that Richard come listen to the wind your trees branch overcome with wind the leaves apologize for their indifference and fall and Native Son was the book all had read all on that level in the inside your eyes lecture better than words words I know them well fall with wind but your eyes so stoic reach for that tree at the outside past the corner of 125th Street past the Ivy of universities past the faces you don't know past the face of Richard Wright past the containment of walls of the structure you feel almost free in
The voice that came out of her chose her as its earthly vehicle, for reasons only the gods can know. She spoke of it as separate from her, a wild creature she had to struggle to master. It floats like an unwieldy bird with a small head, whose wings can't quite control the over-large body soaring dangerously low above jagged peaks, wobbling in the updrafts. An Egyptian sculpture of a priestess, she held up her large, arresting hands, invoking the authority of the ancients  hawks, serpents, bulls and suns surrounded her as she sang, cut into stone. She had that specialized genius for song birds have, an intelligence of too high a vibration for the practical matters of life. But she was unfaithful to her gift  even if for the perfectly understandable reasons of being fashionable and getting a man  otherwise she would never have dieted down, but stayed fat for those spectacular tones, living only for art. It was an operatic fate that the man she suffered over was one of the great rats who dismissed the most magnificent voice in the world as just a whistle in her throat. But after her sexless marriage, this was probably the first man with a hard on she got together with, and duck-like, fixated on, as is so common with us ordinary slobs. With some men, whatever they are besides, the cock is the best part of them, even if they are monsters and, like him, supremely ruthless. And perhaps his selfishness is what ravished her, for it was sex in the raw, the one thing singing wasn't. Like Norma, the Druid nun, who broke her vows for the love of a mere mortal, she, too, was cast aside, not for any high priestess, but a more earthly rival, famous widow, jet set icon, who didn't need his powerful cock, just his power, and to get her hands on his bank account. She threw away her magic voice for a man who threw her away, <> and her crystal brain  whose single-minded command like a bird's was to soar, to sing  shattered, and she fell.
Lord Barrenstock and Epicene, What's it to me that you have been In your pursuit of interdicted joys Seducer of a hundred little boys? Your sins are red about your head And many people wish you dead. You trod the widow in the mire Wronged the son, deceived the sire. You put a fence about the land And made the people's cattle graze on sand. Ratted from many a pool and forced amalgamation And dealt in shares which never had a stock exchange  quotation. Non flocci facio, I do not care For wrongs you made the other fellow bear: 'Tis not for these unsocial acts not these I wet my pen. I would not have you tease, With a repentance smug and overdue For all the things you still desire to do, The ears of an outraged divinity: But oh your tie is crooked and I see Too plain you had an &eacute;clair for your tea. It is this nonchalance about your person  That is the root of my profound aversion. You are too fat. In spite of stays Your shape is painful to the polished gaze; Your uncombed hair grows thin and daily thinner, In fact you're far too ugly to be such a sinner. Lord Barrenstock and Epicene, consider all that you have done Lord Epicene and Barrenstock, yet not two Lords but one, I think you are an object not of fear but pity Be good, my Lord, since you can not be pretty.
I have thought much about snow, the mute pilgrimage of all those flakes and about the dark wanderings of leaves. I have stalked all four seasons and seen how they beat the same path through the same woods again and again. I used to take a multitude of trains, trusting the strategy of tracks, of distance. I sailed on ships trusting the arbitrary north. Now I stand still at my window watching the snow which knows only one direction, falling in silence towards silence.
Cat gone down the road. What she name, girl? Jane (cat). What happen to cat's tongue I ask. I got it she say. What you name? Jane, too. You know what happen Jane (girl) When you got cat's tongue? No. The language change You see it (language) Put its belly down and yawn. That yawn makes the verbs quiver Like cocks of lightning, And lightning is a sign you know. It can put a hole in the ground. The mother of pots is a hole in the ground. The mother of people is God. The mother of language is that cat's tongue. Tongue is a planter like hoe, a silence like seed, a consort like water. What you say you name again? Jane. You gonna be busy girl.
The air is the hide  of a white bull, the light as tame. But if a storm brews  this afternoon when bladderwrack will be  black at his hooves and the first white waves  lather him up into seafoam she will mount him, rein him  in with the right horn and as shorelights fade  riding oblivion back into time where the light of the rosehip  founders, see tameness  reveal its astonishing face.
in the marketplace they sell scandal and heartbreak tomorrow's antique bracelets of an ancestor's teeth all my goods are marked &ldquo;Made Inside&rdquo; under the heart and immaculate eyes I do not translate into cash money: confetti and brass ready for ware and made to order, not my own me? I do not sell well
The link between Barnum and Calas  is the freak against which Rexroth rages,  the six-legged cow, the legless woman for each presents a social concept seeking approval, a pioneer society and a modern asserting the norm by stress of the Minotaur. It's a legitimate maneuver, perhaps it is all art and Barnum our one genius (in the arts) on the moral plane: the freak and the athlete: the circus, by which we return from Agamemnon sober to our tasks of pleasure  and to our minds. If so, in spite of Rexroth, Barnum our Aeschylus, we should show ourselves more courteous to Calas the Greek who has come from Oxford via Paris to enlighten us, affect  less flippancy toward his <> the Portuguese toss connoting  Rexroth's  read one then the other, moral concepts both, curiously linked, by which in time we may behold, &ldquo;the sun set where it did arise and moons grow into virgins' eyes, post sprout leaves and turn a tree and morbid fruit normality,&rdquo; as in the fluctuating molecule; details of The Greatest Show on Earth if the mind survive and I be an American.
If the raccoon gnaws ten percent of the corn, don't set a trap, plant another row. If spinach goes to seed too soon, try it twice, then plant chard. Don't fight the cabbage worms if store-bought is good and cheap. Do very little &ldquo;on principle&rdquo;, life is hard enough as it is. Honor the weeds that love your land and call them flowers, they seed themselves. When phoebes nest in the barn, you have no choice but to leave the big door open also to thieves. Many things will grow in the North Country that they don't grow, but then it's hard to give away your surplus that they won't eat. Nature is profligate, usury is natural, but  One spring when the snow melts, my asparagus will finally be big enough for someone else to eat.
I shall not wait until they are old and frail with spotted hands and pale eyes watering as they gaze at the blank clock No I shall come upon them in their ripening vigor the future rippling all before them like their shining muscled bodies and behold I shall smite them in the fullness of their youth with schools like jails and I shall cause them to burst forth from their jails and to run and leap onto the last car of the subway and to spray their names indelibly onto the transient world and when all the walls have been smeared yea as with excrement then shall they toss light bulbs back and forth to one another until the bulbs break and the game wearies then shall they rip the frames from the windows and smash the windows and I shall cause them to be caught and ordered by the law to make restitution and they shall go to work to make restitution so shall they stand in the line of jobs and they shall stand through the hours of the day even unto the evening and through the long night of cold and stamping feet and boredom and in the morning there shall come the blessing of sunlight and the benediction of jobs and the number of jobs shall be forty and the number of the youths shall be forty thousand rising unto four hundred thousand and unto the millions.
The little biplane that has the river-meadow for landing-field And carries passengers brief rides, Buzzed overhead on the tender blue above the orange of sundown. Below it five troubled night-herons Turned short over the shore from its course, four east, one northward. Beyond them Swam the new moon in amber. I don't know why, but lately the forms of things appear to me with time One of their visible dimensions. The thread brightness of the bent moon appeared enormous, unnumbered Ages of years; the night-herons Their natural size, they have croaked over the shore in the hush at sundown Much longer than human language Has fumbled with the air: but the plane having no past but a certain future, Insect in size as in form, Was also accepted, all these forms of power placed without preference In the grave arrangement of the evening.
No one's quite sure Why they keep it locked At night, but they do, Punctually. At seven The old night-watchman Shuffles by yelling For the wolf and the lamb To stop grazing. There are none, But he yells anyway, As he fusses, As he locks the heavy gate ... I think it's because Of the classy fence, The high, wrought-iron fence With silver spikes.
Streets under trees lamps in their windows gathering dark, Comfortable coming of home, fussing and crying, tears of the tired, yet lamplit windows under the trees, trees under opening stars. Work done, car in the port, children cleared and asleep under stars, why not enough? Held in the hold of the mountainous night And the bend of the street, why not enough? Building and bearing street after street in the town to the mountains and on, state after state in trees of the plains with a plenty or spare and by rivers why not enough? Later from night trees upon street droop of the dark sides, haggard of morning, show that it was.
One day the solitary heron, so tall, so immobile on his usual post, seemed to have shrunk and grown darker. Had I imagined his distinction? Now, when I wanted my friend to see what I had seen, it was gone. And the changed heron had two companions, somber and hunkered down on neighboring posts. Oil succeeding days I saw him again with and without his doubles, but even alone he looked shabby, fidgetty, almost sinister, diminished. I thought it perhaps a matter of winter plumage, seasonal behavior. Till another friend came with me to the shore. &lsquo;Cormorants,&rsquo; he said. It lightened my spirits. My heron's place was usurped, he disdains to return till they leave  and they may not leave; but at least I know it's not he who, shrugging his wings to dry them (a vulgar gesture, though required, it seems, by cormorant feathers) displays the high-shouldered baleful silhouette of Teutonic eagles on old postage-stamps, black on a sallow ground of winter lake-light. At least I know I didn't deceive myself: my absent heron's air of austere dignity was real, whatever hunger sustains his watchfulness.
Schultz, the neighbor's big black dog, used to shit on our scraggly lawn, but we feed him chicken bones and he treats our lawn like his own home. The kids of Fulton Houses in New York smashed windows on our pretty block for spite; we gave them hockey sticks to play with and they smashed more windows. The dog is an anarchist like me, he has a careless dignity  that is, we never think about it, which comes to the same thing. The kids are political like you, they want to win their dignity. They won't, but maybe their children will be friendly dogs and wag their tails with my grandchildren.
I'd come to understand restraint is worthless unless something's about to spill or burst, and that the Commandments understand us perfectly, a large No for the desirability of everything vengeful, delicious, out of reach. I wanted to write ten things that contained as much. Maybe from the beginning the issue was how to live in a world so extravagant it had a sky, in bodies so breakable we had to pray. I welcomed, though, our celestial freedom, our promiscuous flights all returning to earth. Yet what could awe us now? The feeling dies and then the word. Restraint. Extravagance. I liked how one could unshackle the other, that they might become indivisible. Astaire's restraint was a kind of extravagance, while Ginger Rogers danced backwards in high heels and continued to smile! She had such grace it was unfair we couldn't take our eyes off him, but the beautiful is always unfair. I found myself imagining him gone wild, gyrating, leaping, his life suddenly uncontainable. Oh, even as he thrashed, I could tell he was feeling for limits, and what he could bear.
I met a part time re vo lu tion ist too  day (natural hair, african dressed, always angry, in a hurry &amp;c.) talk ing black &amp; sleep ing whi te.
Robinson at cards at the Algonquin; a thin Blue light comes down once more outside the blinds. Gray men in overcoats are ghosts blown past the door. The taxis streak the avenues with yellow, orange, and red. This is Grand Central, Mr. Robinson. Robinson on a roof above the Heights; the boats Mourn like the lost. Water is slate, far down. Through sounds of ice cubes dropped in glass, an osteopath, Dressed for the links, describes an old Intourist tour.  Here's where old Gibbons jumped from, Robinson. Robinson walking in the Park, admiring the elephant. Robinson buying the  Robinson Saying, &ldquo;Hello. Yes, this is Robinson. Sunday At five? I'd love to. Pretty well. And you?&rdquo; Robinson alone at Longchamps, staring at the wall. Robinson afraid, drunk, sobbing Robinson In bed with a Mrs. Morse. Robinson at home; Decisions: Toynbee or luminol? Where the sun Shines, Robinson in flowered trunks, eyes toward The breakers. Where the night ends, Robinson in East Side bars. Robinson in Glen plaid jacket, Scotch-grain shoes, Black four-in-hand and oxford button-down, The jeweled and silent watch that winds itself, the brief- Case, covert topcoat, clothes for spring, all covering His sad and usual heart, dry as a winter leaf.
When my Bonnies dances earth is mine, And a thousand kingdoms I can see; I am thrilled with joy and love and hope, And my sweetheart's goodness comes to me. In her eye the vision Hellas knew, In her step the dream o' wanton Rome; And in garb o' white she mocks a queen, As she finds within my heart a home. When my Bonnie dances fields are green, Blood stained roses bloom, and asphodel; And Beloved walks awhile with me, Where I wooed her in a lonely dell. Rivers feel the warmth o' sunlit gaze, Sweet canary sings within the grove, And I nod as music sways my nymph Where the sprites of Nature lightly rove. When my Bonnie dances, music's stream, Silv'ry white as glows the old moon's breast, Flows into the liquid veins of Youth, Warmer than a maiden's fond caress; And the spheres of Heaven, all attuned, To the rhythmic measure sets the world, While the flowers that sleep on eve of snow From their beds their petals gay unfurl. Oh, my Bonnie, thou hast won a crown, Love and worship from the world of youth, And through dancing graceful thou hast carved On our hearts the magic legend TRUTH; Long may Bonnie live and drink the sweets Men call living, God above call life, Long may Bonnie live and never know Woe and sorrow, bitterness and strife.
Flesh chase night, weather booming and dark hosts of fear pushing the windows even in plastics land. Meat spells stir the funk false messages seal the eery light and hook it to the mind, or a mind, if the identity of pain must be personal. No one understands masks and invention, except masqueraders and inventors. The circle of seeing is that limited, and the thing seen will look like anything. (With the morning's rise snow will substitute for music, and the cold pavement for the scrape of thought. Hands lips moving. Legs and the bottoms of coats; whipped around in the midnight wind. Stars at six, just the two, one dim, the other bright up near the crescent moon (a lighted mouth static as consciousness or the soft skin of love. A head will be filled with someone else's voice. The tips of the fingers will smell, like that someone.
It was all going surprisingly well  Our first school matinee and we'd got up to My sleepwalking scene with the minimum of titters ... Right, enter me, somnambulistically. One deep sigh. Then some lout tosses A banana on to the fore-stage. It got a round? Darling, it got a thunderstorm! Of course, we carried on, but suddenly We had a panto audience Yelling out: &lsquo;Look out! He's behind you!&rsquo; Murders, battles, Birnham Wood, great poetry  All reduced to mockery. The Bard upstaged by a banana. Afterwards we had a flaming row in the Grenville About just who should have removed it And just when  One of the servants, obviously. And ever since, at every performance: Enter myself in those exquisite ribbons And plomp a new out-front banana. Well, yes, it does affect all our performances But actually, they seem to love it. And how, now Ben's in Canada Doling out Wesker to the Eskimos, Can we decide who exits with banana? You can't expect me to parade down here, Do a sort of boob-baring curtsey and announce: &lsquo;Is this a banana that I see before me?&rsquo; Anyway, darling, we may have egg on our faces  But we've got a hit on our hands.
After fall, winds rousing Halloween rains will sometimes persist into November and on a halfmoon-bright night dry the leaves and spool them around, whirls and spouts lifting them as if to pencil the air the way typhoons inscribe seas or the ground, the leaves skimming rises clean and letting go to slack fall in hollows or packing in along the roots of catchment hedges: the day drains down; wind, time lean away and the leaves stiffen still, all night taking on the cold strick fur snow can deepen and fill out.
I dream once more: a vision Sharp, brief and conclusive. Shipwrecked on a desolate coast I crouch on the beach, Miles of interminable dunes behind me, And watch the rolling, endlessly revolving sea, That falls incessantly on the rustling sand. Fog swaddles all. Like a gaunt Sea-pelican come here to die I stare before me, hollow-eyed, Unable to cope with the cold Sunlessness of the air, Oppressed by the sand, the stifling Heavy-hanging fog, the sullen And indifferent sea. Suddenly from the dunes Thrills the twitter of a bird. It pierces the fog like an electric stinger. It is the call of a woman. Urgent, imperative, insistent, It energizes my blood. And lifting my head I see that everything has changed. The world of the possible Tingles about me, crisp and vivid, Compelled into being by the sheer Imperation of a song. Getting to my feet I follow stiffly where it leads, Unmindful of fatigue, the call Echoing as it withdraws, haunting The beachhead, beckoning Through the vales of the distant Strangely inviting dunes.
What messages are these the morning brings my angry city from kind-bosomed fields? The cool, soft words of vegetable things placating her whose rumour never yields to the far-blown persuasion of quiet grass; whose wrinkled fever dew-fall never cools; now for a moment stilled, as wagons pass, to faint remembrance of her ancient pools. The streets of pain and theatres of despair, the heart's metropolis, this peace dispute, matching solidity against permanence; only the moon wears a consistent air, watching the clouds answer the winds&rsquo; thin flute in azure meadows&rsquo; pure inheritance.
The trees at the end of the lawn were still as cliffs. He could see a bit of the moon, a white pebble embedded in the blue sky. On the hour the bell in Switzler Hall tolled. The strokes sank into the stillness of the afternoon. For a while in the sunny paths that led to the colleges, too far away to have their speech or steps on the gravel heard, girls and men were walking. Lying on the warm grass he rhymed: <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <>
How many bullets does it take To kill a fifteen-year-old kid? How many bullets does it take To kill me? How many centuries does it take To bind my mind chain my feet  Rope my neck lynch me  Unfree? From the slave chain to the lynch rope To the bullets of Yorkville, Jamestown, 1619 to 1963: Emancipation Centennial  100 years NOT free. Civil War Centennial: 1965. How many Centennials does it take To kill me, Still alive? When the long hot summers come Death ain't No jive.
the glory is fallen out of the sky the last immortal leaf is dead and the gold year a formal spasm in the dust this is the passing of all shining things therefore we also blandly into receptive earth,O let us descend take shimmering wind these fragile splendors from us crumple them hide them in thy breath drive them in nothingness for we would sleep this is the passing of all shining things no lingering no backward- wondering be unto usO soul,but straight glad feet fearruining and glorygirded faces lead us into the serious steep darkness
For you, who are  a large man, a large man and a delicate poet, whose  flagstoned hall I have stood on the brink of, ice-  blue walls been warmed in and learned, looking at your  wife, your beautiful wife and you think so too   how warm ice-blue can be like an aureole for eyes  of blue, Nordic hair of honey and slept in white and blue  on an empty floor at the top of your house  padded in socks on carpet to a bathroom through books  and books you have lived through and that living-through I catch  a glimpse of, too awed to envy, empties me till I am only  filled with a sense of books unread, life unlived, a span  of time and space out there much too late for the taking  but not for lifting as I did the patchwork quilt  of blue on white, a corner of ... for you, I felt like writing  a line, out of the blue, a poem.
<> Here to-night beside the sea, In my ears the ocean-thunder, In my heart the dreams of thee. The sea, the sea is high, love, Dark, dark, O dark, the sky, love, And sad is my heart. In thy outward journey passing Through the narrow gates of night, Was there travail in the massing Of the waters void of light? O the sea, the sea is high, love, Swift surge the waters by, love, And sad is my heart.
The sparrows by the iron fence-post hardly seen for the dry leaves that half cover them  stirring up the leaves fight and chirp stridently search and peck the sharp gravel to good digestion and love's obscure and insatiable appetite
<> Rustling the starlight from her blowing hair, And eyes in the wake of the ocean's dusk That left her secret shadows smouldering there. There have been eyes remembered of the wind Waking in tears the blue dew-light anew, And eyes that soul-wraiths in the waiting darkness, Eager with strange stirring, wondered through. There have been eyes like dim, unopened panels Behind which listening soul-wraiths heard all in vain, The cry of the years blundering through beauty, The cry of the wind desolate in the rain. There have been eyes that the weird star-rays Like elfin fingers, opened on a vast blue sea, Where ocean-girdled worlds swim, and grandeured hills Grasp dumbly at nothingness eternally. Always there have been eyes innumerable, But never will they close on tired white faces, But worlds and worlds of stars and rains and dawns Plunge blindly weltering through unknown spaces.
Again who am I? Certainly not the boy I started out to be nor the man nor the poet Sometimes alone &amp; saddened (which is to say joyous) I get glimpses of myself the eternal spirit floating from flower to tree to grasshopper, thru whole herds of cattle I become the skies, the very air itself  Me: all things Me: nothing It would confuse me if I didnt know these lbs. of meat bearing the name my people gave me to be simply every body's condition My soul knows no name, no home in being My soul seeks your soul Let us laugh each at the other &amp; be friends
You were by my side, though I could not see you, Your beauty being sucked up by the moon In whose broad light, streaming across the valley, We could match colours or read the finest print, While swart tree shadows rose from living roots Like a stockade planted against intrusion. But since dawn spread, birds everywhere wakeful And the sun risen masterly from the East, Where are you now? Not standing at my side But gone with the moon, sucked away into daylight, All magic vanished, save for the rare instant When a sudden arrow-shot transfixes me. Marry into your tribe, bear noble sons Never to call me father which is forbidden To poets by the laws of moon magic, The Goddess being forever a fierce virgin And chastening all love with prohibition Of what her untranslatable truth transcends.
Antonia greases limp braids Billy humps mezzanine contraband Criticism interrupts nozzle deadline Depression jargon opens evening Event kickoff parade forecast Flounder Lord quashes goblet Gashes Merlin's reflective ham Horace neutralizes serious incident Itinerant orators trounce jinx Juvenile pecadillos urbane kennel Kiosk quip vapors legible Livid research wanderer masticates Meteor shower xenophobes nullify Neckline tempo yearning ossification Office undergoes zephyr plague Punitive vexations anchor quill Querulous woodwind buccaneer recital Renounce xeroxing cheery swigs Salami yams dill tuna Turtle zebra eagle unicorn Uhlan admonishes fulminating veil Vertiginous blue gladiator wall Windward caravel hinders xebec Xylophone duress initiates yank Yurt eskimo joss ziggurat Zeppelin flames kindle Antonia
This is a glove or a book from a book club This is the sun or a layer of mud This is Monday, this an altered word This is the village of reason and this an eye torn out This is the father or a number on a chart This is a substitute, this the thing you are This is the varnished picture or else an accepted response This is the door and this the word for door This is a reflex caused by falling and this a prisoner with an orange This is a name you know and this is the poison to make you well This is the mechanism and this the shadow of a bridge This is a curve and this its thirst This is Monday, this her damaged word This is the trace and this the term unmarked This is the sonnet and this its burning house You are in this play You are its landscape This is an assumption the length of an arm This is a poppy, this an epilogue
I speak Who am come down from a glacial region north of here, Where a cold river Cuts its way to a colder sea, Leaves the brown stain of its mark Far out, it is said, for the feeding fish. I speak, I speak. I speak from the chattering lips of a cold man, A man cut to the core; Speak from the numbed mouth, Blue in its dearth; Speak from the hobbling frame, From the limp of a cold place, A cold region. I speak from a cold heart. I cry out of a cold climate. I shake the head of a cold-encrusted man. I blow a blue breath. I come from a cold place. I cry out for another future.
Mobs are like the Gulf Stream, Like the vast Atlantic. In your fragile boats you ride, Conceited folk at ease. Far beneath are dancers, Mermen wild and frantic, Circling round the giant glowing Sea-anemones. &ldquo;Crude, ill-smelling voters,  Herds,&rdquo; to you in seeming. But to me their draggled clothes Are scales of gold and red. Ah, the pink sea-horses, Green sea-dragons gleaming, And knights that chase the dragons And spear them till they're dead! Wisdom waits the diver In the social ocean  Rainbow shells of wonder, Piled into a throne. I would go exploring Through the wide commotion, Building under some deep cliff A pearl-throne all my own. Yesterday I dived there, Grinned at all the roaring, Clinging to the corals for a flash, Defying death. Mermen came rejoicing, In procession pouring, Yet I lost my feeble grip And came above for breath. I would be a merman. Not in desperation A momentary diver Blue for lack of air. But with gills deep-breathing Swim amid the nation  Finny feet and hands forsooth, Sea-laurels in my hair.
<>  Look at the little darlings in the corn!  The rye is taller than you, who think yourself  So high and mighty: look how its heads are borne  Dark and proud on the sky, like a number of knights  Passing with spears and pennants and manly scorn.  And always likely! Oh, if I could ride  With my head held high-serene against the sky  Do you think I'd have a creature like you at my side  With your gloom and your doubt that you love me?   O darling rye,  How I adore you for your simple pride!  And those bright fireflies wafting in between  And over the swaying cornstalks, just above  All their dark-feathered helmets, like little green  Stars come low and wandering here for love  Of this dark earth, and wandering all serene !  How I adore you, you happy things, you dears  Riding the air and carrying all the time  Your little lanterns behind you: it cheers  My heart to see you settling and trying to climb  The corn-stalks, tipping with fire their spears.  All over the corn's dim motion, against the blue  Dark sky of night, the wandering glitter, the swarm  Of questing brilliant things: you joy, you true  Spirit of careless joy: ah, how I warm  My poor and perished soul at the joy of you! <>  You're a fool, woman. I love you, and you know I do!   Lord, take his love away, it makes him whine.  And I give you everything that you want me to.   Lord, dear Lord, do you think he ever
I saw a little dog locked in a car Bursting his eyes with barking; The sun was scattered on the leaves And the sumac trees turning. The window-dresser leered at the legs Below him, with devotion; The violet eyes of plaster casts Stare for an Indian ocean. The newspaper man who kicks the girls Chalks up a suicide's hanging; A window high in the street runs up, A blackbird starts singing. Hot air, stale food, fans to the street The pavements harden; A brisk smart woman picks her way Admired, admiring. The dustbins fill, the flowers fade; The factory gates are opening And through the early autumn dusk Lamps and fires are lighting. Neon, sulphur and mercury Throw on the twisted paper Shadows that no human casts; The moon sails in the river. Live lace curtains in the wind Creep in the sleeper's nightmares; Oblivious of the moon's eyes Locked in arms the lovers. In abandoned lorry cabs Never wake the dead; Through the waves of morning mist Sumac trees burn red.
When you carry my casket on the day of my death, Don't think I'm sorry to leave this world; Don't mourn for me and cry, &ldquo;No more, no more ...&rdquo; You'd be sadly mistaken. When you see my casket, don't cry, &ldquo;Gone, gone ...&rdquo; Union and reunion are mine in that hour. When you lower me into the grave, don't say, &ldquo;Goodbye, goodbye ...&rdquo; The grave is a curtain obscuring the nearness of paradise. After seeing the going down, imagine the coming up. Has setting ever put an end to sunrise? To you it seems like a sinking, but is really a rising. What seed planted didn't finally grow? Then why this doubt of yours about a seed of the human? What bucket ever sent down didn't come up brimful? Why should Joseph of the spirit complain about the well? When you shut your mouth on this side, open it on the other.
Here, where the baby paddles in the gutter,  Here in the slaty greyness and the gas, Here where the women wear dark shawls and mutter  A hasty word as other women pass, Telling the secret, telling, clucking and tutting,  Sighing, or saying that it served her right, The bitch! the words and weather both are cutting  In Causewayend, on this November night. At pavement's end and in the slaty weather  I stare with glazing eyes at meagre stone, Rain and the gas are sputtering together  A dreary tune! O leave my heart alone, O leave my heart alone, I tell my sorrows,  For I will soothe you in a softer bed And I will numb your grief with fat to-morrows  Who break your milk teeth on this stony bread! They do not hear. Thought stings me like an adder,  A doorway's sagging plumb-line squints at me, The fat sky gurgles like a swollen-bladder  With the foul rain that rains on poverty.
So this is it: washed up on my island My hands sweat and uncalm silence Cancels sleep with echoes of abjection And confused winds rustling slack sails The continuous swirlings-up of life That precede death the way sex precedes anxiety Or anger leads to sorrow suggest a flat Faced dimensionless timepiece A particulate universe that has no space And which once tinkered with opens out Into the cosmos like a fan without hinges One evening in antiquity the sun slides down The emotional vibrato that bends long Vowels like strings tensed too tight: Tomorrow never knows the difference, though That won't get you off the hook of tonight
Mother of flames, The men that went ahunting Are asleep in the snow drifts. You have kept the fire burning! Crooked fingers that pull Fuel from among the wet leaves, Mother of flames You have kept the fire burning! The young wives have fallen asleep With wet hair, weeping, Mother of flames! The young men raised the heavy spears And are gone prowling in the darkness. O mother of flames, You who have kept the fire burning! Lo, I am helpless! Would God they had taken me with them!
Us if therefore must forget ourselves) or?if because more than sleep like sleep are they move who cannot be(never may live have pain grow joy)alive (therefore and or if should night what open beyond all memories a tomorrow of descending brightful undeath)make we why prayer for how things which do not move and stern or with proudly and peace or only(and if because we shall into silent go)into whitely i shall? go(into snow you will Go
When, in the dark, the frost cracks on the window The children awaken, and whisper. One says the moonlight grated like a skate Across the freezing river. Another hears the starlight breaking like a knifeblade Upon the silent, steelbright pond. They say the trees are stiller than the frozen water From waiting for a shouting light, a heavenly message. Yet it is far from Christmas, when a star Sang in the pane, as brittle as their innocence! For now the light of early Lent Glitters upon the icy step  &ldquo;We have wept letters to our patron saints, (The children say) yet slept before they ended.&rdquo; Oh, is there in this night no sound of strings, of singers? None coming from the wedding, no, nor Bridegroom's (The sleepy virgins stir, and trim their lamps.) The moonlight rings upon the ice as sudden as a footstep; Starlight clinks upon the dooryard stone, too like a latch, And the children are, again, awake, And all call out in whispers to their guardian angels.
In that childhood time  of peering out from a hut of leaves  at the ebb and flow  though little did  sun perhaps on a glint of straw, wind  ballooning a shirt or branch  each gust and pause, drift  of skin between warm and cold, was a source  of mindless patience. How a world could be  changed from moment to moment, broken  by sudden entrances a bumblebee, helicopter;  resumed and our solitude, brushing wings  with its passing by be, for the contact  safer: this was the ebb and flow  we watched for as though each shift of  grass, flight of paper float of shadow across a path  weren't just earth's response to a moving heaven  but the heart's reply shaping life  and we its recording angel.
Your eyes are in my head Like a mountain morning, Rising heat and light  Every sixth wave is you Your fingers on the lips Of the poem  As the afternoon you came Full A concerto of dreams The senses drumming a New guitar Your knees parallel to Your eyes The fecundity of your hair In a dance A passage leading to the Higher elevations of the Panorama Which through dresses of shades Arrived at its darkest night Gown Your tongue of sweet pineapple With a flirt of coco  It was then that through a Larger melody of ingredients Our eyes ran into the nature Of themselves And locked like two owls  Blood bones and soul In the sight  The vision a dictionary of Boleros I heard every limerick of Invention  As we sat under the umbrellas Of the trees The sea waving not too far The moon above A rich port Of true revelation peeling Trees in amorous growth On the horizon Flamenco.
just before dark, when streets shine under street lamps, not to feel easy doing that on a November evening, and after boarding a bus, crowded at rush hour, finally get a seat next to someone who is drunk although quiet enough, in fact asleep, someone who leans against you; never to think, &ldquo;What good after all are worlds apart,&rdquo; and continue thinking that while passing vacant lots, weeds, pools on sidewalks, piles of wet leaves, and store windows their intricate displays  and the red lights of cars reflecting in water, white lights of cars; never to be at ease with others as I am now, on my way to have dinner in a restaurant where I am known, where a young woman at the piano, a music student she is very good  will play Satie if I ask; never to stop and go again, and wait, on my way to eat and drink and hear music  three small piano pieces, a little sad that would be a great loss.
In the chemist's at night-time swathed counters and lights turned down lean and surround us. Waiting for our prescriptions we clock these sounds: a baby's peaked hush, hawked breath. I pay a pound and pills fall in my curled palms. Holding their white packages tenderly patients track back to the pain. &lsquo;Why is the man shouting?&rsquo; Oliver asks me. I answer, &lsquo;He wants to go home.&rsquo; Softly, muffled by cloth the words still come and the red-streaked drunkard goes past us, rage scalding us. I would not dare bring happiness into the chemist's at night-time. Its gift-wrapped lack of assistance still presses as suffering closes the blinded windows.
if the world should collapse little king it would go down with you into the hole you make darkness &amp; I make darkness it's all the same somebody comes out of it the suckers go back in beautiful men &amp; beautiful women come alive we are at the beginning of a dream someone will have to write the great book of the century assembled as dream-work the authors move like children into death dancing like children
These coal-black horses were not made of water. Their half-stripped ramrod riders more like androids than mercenaries bounced in their stirrups, swearing from mouths like slits, giving invisible nudges to iron flanks that knew their masters. The horses clattered across the courtyard for an airing, heartily slapped by stable-boys, snorting and farting between snorts, a morning freedom before kettledrums. Not a beat yet, only skylarks rising from the long grass all round, and rustlings half-sensed where the wind picked a grove. The riders might have eaten larks, but never heard them, or if they did it entered generally into a wellbeing they need never examine, keeping a tight rein with blank mind, but whistling suddenly, tunelessly through their teeth, almost interminably at last, hardly more meaningfully than the field river not far off, rehearsing what it could not say better, over and over, yet we might lean to thinking them more human. Fugitives heard that whistling, froze, and shivered.
On the High Priest's tunic Golden pomegranates, silver bells. Alexander, off for Egypt, Was stilled by the luster of robes. Bright as that boy-god's city When it stood Second town to Rome, The Priest's robe must have gathered Such light as Pharos throws. On the day of festival They sailed to the Island  Jews and many others  &ldquo;Reverencing the place in which The light of interpretation First shone forth.&rdquo; A god was translated By those rabbis. The sibylline oracles Spoke Messianic prophecies. The gates of allegory Are never closed.
goo-dmore-ning(en ter)nize-aday(most gently herculanean my mortal)yoo make sno eye kil yoo(friend the laughing grinning)we no(smiling)strike agains De Big Boss (crying)jew wop rich poor(sing ing) He no care so what yoo-gointa-doo?(ice coal wood man)nic he like wint-air nic like ot-am sum-air(young old nic) like spring yoo un-air-stan?me crazy me like evry-ting
The All-Day Bird, the artist, whitethroated sparrow, striving in hope and good faith to make his notes ever more precise, closer to what he knows. There is the proposition and the development. The way one grows from the other. The All-Day Bird ponders. May the first note be round enough and those that follow fine, fine as sweetgrass, prays the All-Day Bird. Fine as the tail of a lizard, as a leaf of chives  the  falling between note and note, a  defining them. The dew is on the vineleaves. My tree is lit with the break of day. Sun light. Light. light light light.
A spinster with a mouth like a dam and a heart like a gyroscope is seen stirring the shreds of a drab blue dress of Bedford cord into the kitchen stove. It is Sunday, three days after the murders. At the trial witnesses layer their stories like transparencies. The dress was new, yes, but of a cheap fabric, badly soiled with paint around the edges, best got rid of. And so, because there is no real evidence against her, nothing (nothing except a spot of blood on a white petticoat, in back, beneath the placket, a how to put it delicately? souvenir of her monthly illness), and because she has been active in church organizations, and because she is a woman, and a lady, they acquit her. She stays in that city where under every jumprope children mock her to the music of &ldquo;Ta-ra-ra-boom-de-ay.&rdquo; She doesn't say, even once, what she is thinking, but her heart keeps spinning, spinning. If she calls herself Lizbeth now, it is only that she always did like Lizbeth better. She moves to a gabled mansion on a hill and drives all over the city in a pony cart. Her investments multiply like fishes. She entertains some people from the theatre, an event that shocks her neighbors. One autumn when the maples turn oppressively red, she unlocks her smile for the paperboy who comes in for milk and cookies on his collection day and is not afraid, or does not know. She draws a will, leaving money for the care of animals. And still later, when her heart, like a child's toy, is winding down and slowing on its axis, she is suddenly very surprised to discover she cannot remember whether it really was paint or menstrual blood, or blood, or whether it matters.
ygUDuh ydoan yunnuhstan ydoan o yunnuhstan dem yguduh ged yunnuhstan dem doidee yguduh ged riduh ydoan o nudn LISN bud LISN dem gud am lidl yelluh bas tuds weer goin duhSIVILEYEzum
The eastern sky at sunset taking the glow of the west: the west a clear stillness. The east flinging nets of cloud to hold the rose light a moment longer: the western hill dark to blackness. The ants on their acropolis prepare for the night. The vine among the rocks heavy with grapes the shadows of September among the gold glint of the grass among shining willow leaves the small birds moving silent in the presence of a new season. In the last sunlight human figures dark on the hill outlined  a fur of gold about their shoulders and heads, a blur defining them. Down by the fallen fruit in the old orchard the air grows cold. The hill hides the sun. A sense of the present rises out of earth and grass, enters the feet, ascends into the genitals, constricting the breast, lightening the head a wisdom, a shiver, a delight that what is passing is here, as if a snake went by, green in the gray leaves.
<> <> <> <> Is the tree by the vine wrapped around? Vine overshadowed by tree-taking ground? Depends on the tree, depends on the vine. Chokeberries choke, grape-blossoms shine. Where each can flourish prodigally, what vine would pine to be a tree? See vine and tree face rain and sun; rain-dazzled, sun-splattered, see both as one.  Though tree and vine are not wholly bound; come closer and trace separate roots in the ground. But stand away clear or come near enough; you cannot tell the smooth from rough. Force all your strength, pull bough from tree  behold the vine straightway free. Let go restraint and back they spring  tree and vine together cling hardy and sweet intertwined flow; wound in a spiral, thrive and grow. Is he the tree? Is she the vine? Your answer may diverge from mine.
<> The trombone pony neighs and the tuba jackass snorts. The banjo tickles and titters too awful. The chippies talk about the funnies in the papers. The cartoonists weep in their beer. Ship riveters talk with their feet. To the feet of floozies under the tables. A quartet of white hopes mourn with interspersed snickers: &ldquo;I got the blues. I got the blues. I got the blues.&rdquo; And ... as we said earlier: The cartoonists weep in their beer.
a grin without a face(a look without an i) be care ful(touch noth ing)or it'll disapp ear bangl essly(into sweet the earth)&amp; nobody (including our selves) will reme mber (for 1 frac tion of a mo ment)where what how when who why which (or anything)
They found him sitting in a chair: continual and rigid ease poured downward through his lips and heart, entered his veins and spread until paralysis possessed his knees. The evanescent liquid still bubbling overflows the glass; and no one hears the telephone ringing while friends and strangers pass. Call taxis, wake the coroner, police: the young ex-millionaire is dead. Examine unpaid bills  insurance blanks and cheques unfold from refuse in a right-hand drawer to read before the body's cold, lifelike, resembling what we were: erect, alert, the sun-tanned head. Polo or golf this afternoon, and night, the country club or bar? &ldquo;Drink Death to end all poverty: two millions gone  and stir no more.&rdquo; Because I know his kind too well I knew his fears and the release of energy that thinned his blood was no certificate of peace, but like communiques in war. The startled Scapegoat sought his way to safe oblivion that lured him, made his life intact, immured his debts and tricked old friends. I hear his voice: I wake to hear storm-tilted echoes of his name. It is his death again: the same sleek ambulance throbs at his door.
Thaws snow-clear the fields and woods, and leaves snow's small weight touched down last fall crinkle to the breezes and rise gathering dry to dash about, whirl with the liveliness of the dead re-winded, the end of stories not their story's end, everything else too naked to swish or starkly sway and nothing else free to travel.
From Clee to heaven the beacon burns,  The shires have seen it plain, From north and south the sign returns  And beacons burn again. Look left, look right, the hills are bright,  The dales are light between, Because 'tis fifty years to-night  That God has saved the Queen. Now, when the flame they watch not towers  About the soil they trod, Lads, we'll remember friends of ours  Who shared the work with God. To skies that knit their heartstrings right,  To fields that bred them brave, The saviours come not home to-night:  Themselves they could not save. It dawns in Asia, tombstones show  And Shropshire names are read; And the Nile spills his overflow  Beside the Severn's dead. We pledge in peace by farm and town  The Queen they served in war, And fire the beacons up and down  The land they perished for. &lsquo;God save the Queen&rsquo; we living sing,  From height to height 'tis heard; And with the rest your voices ring,  Lads of the Fifty-third. Oh, God will save her, fear you not:  Be you the men you've been, Get you the sons your fathers got,  And God will save the Queen.
<> Where, long unfollowed by sagacious man, A scrub that once had been a pathway ran Blindly from nowhere and to nowhere led, One might as well have been among the dead As half way there alive; so I began Like a malingering pioneer to plan A vain return with one last look ahead. And it was then that like a spoken word Where there was none to speak, insensibly A flash of blue that might have been a bird Grew soon to the calm wonder of the sea  Calm as a quiet sky that looked to be Arching a world where nothing had occurred.
Mr Over is dead He died fighting and true And on his tombstone they wrote Over to You. And who pray is this You To whom Mr Over is gone? Oh if we only knew that We should not do wrong. But who is this beautiful You We all of us long for so much Is he not our friend and our brother Our father and such? Yes he is this and much more This is but a portion A sea-drop in a bucket Taken from the ocean So the voices spake Softly above my head And a voice in my heart cried: Follow Where he has led And a devil's voice cried: Happy Happy the dead.
We come here tourist on a bad sky day, warm milk at 15,000 and the swamp across the freeway blinding white. No theory to explain the lack of saint, torn tapestry. Pews seem built for pygmies, and a drunk once damned mosquitoes from the pulpit, raging red with Bible and imagined plague. Their spirits buoyed, pioneers left running for the nothing certain nowhere west. Somewhere, say where Ritzville is, they would remember these crass pillars lovely and a moving sermon they had never heard. More's bad here than just the sky. The valley we came in on: Mullan. Wallace. Jokes about the whores. Kellogg and, without salvation, Smelterville. A stream so slate with crap the name pollutes the world. Man will die again to do this to his soul. And over the next hill he never crosses, promises: love, grass, a white cathedral, glandular revival and a new trout, three tall dorsal fins. We exit from the mission, blind. The haze still hangs amplifying glare until two centuries of immigrants in tears seem natural as rain. The hex is on. The freeway covers arrows, and the swamp a spear with feathers meaning stop. This dry pale day, cars below crawl thirsty, 500 miles to go before the nation quits.
What potions have I drunk? Not siren tears, where there was no come-on. Your presence was enough to make me want your presence, yet you were the pursuer. What made you speak to me that night? It comes up in flashes, a hubbub of Yevtushenko autographs, MacDiarmid being whisked to his car Loki in a lounge-suit  the Bute Hall skailing like a swarm of bees, janitors hovering to shoo us down the stairs from Babiy Yar and Simbirsk Fair, and you, a splash of red jeans against the wall asking me about King Billy till everything else went out from my mind and we went out together into a still cold clear November. Now nothing is still I shake. Nothing is cold I burn. Nothing is clear I toss and turn. And somehow we've got through December. Hope brings my fear of the new year.
I watched the turtle dwindle day by day, Get more remote, lie limp upon my hand; When offered food he turned his head away; The emerald shell grew soft. Quite near the end Those withdrawn paws stretched out to grasp His long head in a poignant dying gesture. It was so strangely like a human clasp, My heart cracked for the brother creature. I buried him, wrapped in a lettuce leaf, The vivid eye sunk inward, a dull stone. So this was it, the universal grief: Each bears his own end knit up in the bone. Where are the dead? we ask, as we hurtle Toward the dark, part of this strange creation, One with each limpet, leaf, and smallest turtle  Cry out for life, cry out in desperation! Who will remember you when I have gone, My darling ones, or who remember me? Only in our wild hearts the dead live on. Yet these frail engines bound to mystery Break the harsh turn of all creation's wheel, For we remember China, Greece, and Rome, Our mothers and our fathers, and we steal From death itself rich store, and bring it home.
&lsquo;Scrambled eggs&rsquo; I called them, Those yellowy shy clusters Curding the sun Under spring hedgerows. Only inches away then I thought them more beautiful Than rose or delphinium. Emblems almost, I never knew their name. (Look, look.  But periwinkle I learnt, Tripped on my child-tongue, Those wandering-wild Tendrils of wood ways, Peepings of sky Dull or bright as the weather. &lsquo;Blue eyes&rsquo; I called them. (Look, look.  How fabled our lives! The yellowy curds You serve to sustain me Are tastier than you know. Blue eyes across the table Look pale glimmers of me.
I am glad, I think, my happy mother died Before the German airplanes over the English countryside Dropped bombs into the peaceful hamlets that we used to know  Sturminster-Newton, and the road that used to run Past bridge, past cows in meadow, Warm in the sun, Cool in the elm-tree's shadow, To the thatched cottage roofs of Shillingstone; Dropped bombs on Romsey Abbey, where the aging records show (Or did a little while ago) In faded ink and elegant fine hand The name or a boy baby christened there In 15 (I forget the year) Later to sail away to this free land
Here in the snow: three hunters with dogs and pikes trekking over a hill, into and out of those famous footprints  famous and still. What did they catch? They have little to show on their bowed backs. Unlike the delicate skaters below, these are grim; they look ill. In the village, it's zero. Bent shapes in black clouts, raw faces aglow in the firelight, burning the wind for warmth, or their hunger's kill. What happens next? In the unpainted picture? The hunters arrive, pull off their caked boots, curse the weather slump down over stoups ... Who's painting them now? What has survived to unbandage my eyes as I trudge through this snow, with my dog and stick, four hundred winters ago?
contend in a sea which the land partly encloses shielding them from the too-heavy blows of an ungoverned ocean which when it chooses tortures the biggest hulls, the best man knows to pit against its beatings, and sinks them pitilessly. Mothlike in mists, scintillant in the minute brilliance of cloudless days, with broad bellying sails they glide to the wind tossing green water from their sharp prows while over them the crew crawls ant-like, solicitously grooming them, releasing, making fast as they turn, lean far over and having caught the wind again, side by side, head for the mark. In a well guarded arena of open water surrounded by lesser and greater craft which, sycophant, lumbering and flittering follow them, they appear youthful, rare as the light of a happy eye, live with the grace of all that in the mind is fleckless, free and  naturally to be desired. Now the sea which holds them is moody, lapping their glossy sides, as if feeling for some slightest flaw but fails completely. Today no race. Then the wind comes again. The yachts move, jockeying for a start, the signal is set and they are off. Now the waves strike at them but they are too well made, they slip through, though they take in canvas. Arms with hands grasping seek to clutch at the prows. Bodies thrown recklessly in the way are cut aside. It is a sea of faces about them in agony, in despair until the horror of the race dawns staggering the mind, the whole sea become an entanglement of watery bodies lost to the world bearing what they cannot hold. Broken, beaten, desolate, reaching from the dead to be taken up they cry out, failing, failing! their cries rising in waves still as the skillful yachts pass over.
we do not realize what we want until we learn what we are willing to give up for it and you did God knows you did when swimming was no longer possible you learned to sink you learned to live at the bottom of the sea now tell me of the chambers where you sleep tell me it does not matter lie if you must is your bed luminous is it festooned with seaweed do all your narrow windows open onto water is the tide kind to you forgive me if I do not understand last night a stranger asked me  <> I answered her
You stay for a while beside me with your beauty young and rare, Though your light limbs are as limber as the foal's that follows the mare; Brow fair and young and tender where thought has scarce begun, Hair bright as the breast of the eagle when he strains up to the sun! In the space of a broken castle I found you on a day When the call of the new-come cuckoo went with me all the way, You stood by un-mortised stones that were rough and black with age, The fawn beloved of the hunter in the panther's broken cage! And we went down together by paths your childhood knew, Remote you went beside me like the spirit of the dew, Hard were the hedgerows still, sloe-bloom was their scanty dower, You slipped it within your bosom, the bloom that scarce is flower! And now you stay beside me with your beauty young and rare, Though your light limbs are as limber as the foal's that follows the mare, Brow fair and young and tender where thought has scarce begun, Hair bright as the breast of the eagle when he strains up to the sun!
That time my grandmother dragged me through the perfume aisles at Saks, she held me up by my arm, hissing, &ldquo;Stand up,&rdquo; through clenched teeth, her eyes bright as a dog's cornered in the light. She said it over and over, as if she were Jesus, and I were dead. She had been solid as a tree, a fur around her neck, a light-skinned matron whose car was parked, who walked on swirling marble and passed through brass openings in 1945. There was not even a black elevator operator at Saks. The saleswoman had brought velvet leggings to lace me in, and cooed, as if in the service of all grandmothers. My grandmother had smiled, but not hungrily, not like my mother who hated them, but wanted to please, and they had smiled back, as if they were wearing wooden collars. When my legs gave out, my grandmother dragged me up and held me like God holds saints by the roots of the hair. I begged her to believe I couldn't help it. Stumbling, her face white with sweat, she pushed me through the crowd, rushing away from those eyes that saw through her clothes, under her skin, all the way down to the transparent genes confessing.
Above children, over the herd of plastic animals, the armaments, our angel keeps its shy place. Something of its silence works to ease our daily discontents. Mostly, though, it waits. We hardly look at it. We call it  tucked tight as the lightning bug in our fists, stilled as we are in sometime fevers. I touch it now for one who sings, the woman who scoffs at angels, yet nailed up the thing.
We render the palpable by waiting in shallow huts: eternity: begin an edging a three-master with the wind at lee the hard run by the east over I say thanks for the lagoon, quick tide, spits, barbed eyot of sand allowing me a morn, night, gruff cassia bough: twisting we might handle another path: the barley portico, dazzling film of ochre or wheat yield: but the conceit was not that, the urge and philos slowed us by the creek and plain: music-like magically earth pure and lilac studded the cicada (he was low and timorous in thimbleberry): snippy, precious and lightly come to Brigadoon or Camelot by shrimp boat or culvert: by bike you will praise the lowly and canticle the high and like Gandhi you will thin; go ever so close to the vast clumps and tarns of grass  the tyranny of heart is so difficult and with us
I appear like a bird from nowhere. I have a new name. I am as clean as a whistle. I beat the buttermilk in big white bowls until it is smooth. I wash the pearly plates under the tap, and fifty canvas bumpers and fifty socks. They drip in the sun below grey mountains like the moon's. Each night I lift the children in their sleep and hold out the china pot for them: <> <> as I tiptoe from bed to bed ... Around midnight, I go to the geyser below Hekla and bathe in the warm water. I am a short fat English girl. I am twenty-five mothers. I lead my children in a line across the heather to the church. The father watches me from his dark door. He shakes his head, and takes me by the hand: <> And now, September, dust is flying: the bus is here. I am ready. I am on my way to Reykjavik, Leith, Liverpool ... The children of the Barnaheimili&eth; are running to the gate like hens. <> <>
This angel, who mediates between us and the world underneath us, trots ahead so cheerfully. Now and then she bends her spine down hard, like a dowser's branch, over some, to her, well-known splashing spot of holy water, of which she herself in turn carefully besoms out a thrifty sprinkle. Trotting ahead again, she scribbles her spine's continuation into immaterial et cetera, thus signaling that it is safe for us now to go wagging our legs along vertically as we do, across the ups and downs under which lie ancestors dog-toothed millennia ago into oblivion. Tonight she will crouch at the hearth, where demons' breaths flutter up among the logs, gnawing a freshly unearthed bone bone of a dog, if possible making logs and bone together cry through the room,
In perfect printed breath old desire patterns mist up the windows of this morning's Trailways Bus bound for sleepy Syracuse And what desire powers me now that the storm is on, now that wet &amp; snowy fog is racing straight ahead, all tree-lined in the heatless light? Once the spiritualist hub of the New World, Rochester keeps updating her &ldquo;St. Lawrence Blues&rdquo; with flour, apples, cherries, music; this is Xerox &amp; Kodak's Xanadu. Around this racing, bumptious bus there is no village that encapsulates the soul like flesh &amp; thought. Breath, let all my morning wanting exhale itself into the perfect emptiness of afternoon. Let noon soon lose its moodiness in Syracuse, infused with nightlessness.
Dogs take new friends abruptly and by smell. Cats' meetings are neat, tactual, caressive. Monkeys exchange their fleas before they speak. Snakes, no doubt, coil by coil reach mutual knowledge. We then, at first encounter, should be silent; Not court the cortex but the epidermis; Not work from inside out but outside in; Discover each other's flesh, its scent and texture; Familiarize the sinews and the nerve-ends, The hands, the hair before the inept lips open. Instead of which we are resonant, explicit. Our words like windows intercept our meaning. Our four eyes fence and flinch and awkwardly Wince into shadow, slide oblique to ambush. Hands stir, retract. The pulse is insulated. Blood is turned inwards, lonely; skin unhappy ... While always under all, but interrupted, Antenn&aelig; stretch ... waver ... and almost ... touch.
They brought me this wild plant, its leaves   a yellowish green, its flowers  like crafted cups of a violet hue   for drinking the light.  I ask, &lsquo;What's it called?&rsquo;   No one knows. It belongs to the universe's infinite unfamiliar wing,   where the sky's nameless stars also belong.  So I've made it captive in a pet-name   to get to know it by myself in private.    I call it &lsquo;Peyali&rsquo;, Miss Cup. Invited by the garden, they've all come    dahlia, fuchsia, marigold.  But this one enjoys the unspotted freedom that comes   from not being cared for, not being bound by caste.   It's a Baul, living on society's edge. In no time at all its flowers have fallen off.   The sound that the falls made     couldn't be caught by ears. The conjunction of moments that make up this plant's horoscope  is infinitesimal. The honey stored in its bosom  is a minute drop. Its journey's complete in a tiny spot of time,  even as the fire-petalled sun completes its flowering   in an eon's span. This plant's little history's written by the cosmic scribe  with a very small pen in the corner of a very small page. Yet at the same time is that vast history unfolded,  where sight cannot climb from one page to the next.  The currents of centuries that flow without intermission   like slow-motion waves, carrying in their course    the rises and falls of so many mountain-chains,   in seas and deserts so many costume-changes  the same endless time's long flow has advanced   through creation's conflicts    this floweret's primeval purpose. For millions of years in the path of its flowering and falling  that ancient purpose has stayed new, alive, mobile.   Its finished, finalised picture's not appeared yet. This purpose without body, that picture without lines   in which invisible's vision do they live without end? In the infinite imagination of the same invisible  which holds me and the history of all men   of the past and of the future.
<> Sky: and the things of earth: there are the things Partly of earth, like meadowlarks and rare Designs of cobweb where the bright dew clings. There is the body's glide into a deep Lake where the water closes cool and green: Patterns of words like music heard in sleep: Singing: the fall of stars, seen, half-unseen. Strange that a man should know these these things and still Be lost in the mind's vortex, in the blowing Storm of the soul: strange that they should not fill The mind and heart with peace beyond all knowing: That having these a man should stand and cry His agony to the world's midnight sky.
I always went for natural shapes, I slid on the mud to get away from my street, I ripped my leather jacket on the hill hanging on to a broken branch; I swung there, one foot turned, one foot almost lost. It took me an hour to find a certain willow; I say an hour but it was more like twenty minutes. I went to the roundhouse and back in fifteen or twenty minutes, I went to the station itself in half an hour. Six in the morning was my time, I picked up three kinds of grass, I wrapped them in my notebook. Once there was a truck, it was called a stakesider, I think the bed lifted up; the wheels were scattered, the cab was gone, a kind of Eastern tumbleweed hung from the axle. Once there was an opossum broken in two, the head was wet from the rain, the tongue was rolling, there was a pool of water in the thorax. I always went to the bridge and back, there was a white angora on the tracks, her bell was jingling; I tried to keep her away from the carcass, I tried to help the crows. There was a tire buried in the mud, someone had thrown it down, the leaves were planted inside it; I knelt there hating the cat. I read the Sunday paper standing on the rubbish. I broke a stick before I climbed the hill, it helped me think, one day it was a sword, one day a crutch, one day it was a broom. I held it up with two of my fingers, I smashed some branches, I cut some ugly roots, it helped me sleep at night, having it there beside my bed, leaving it behind the door, either inside or outside. One day it was an insect, one day a flutist leaning with one arm out and one leg splattered; one day an arbor vitae, one day a maple.
We came behind him by the wall,  My brethren drew their brands, And they had strength to strike him down   And I to bind his hands. Only once, to a lantern gleam,  He turned his face from the wall, And it was as the accusing angel's face  On the day when the stars shall fall. I grasped the axe with shaking hands,  I stared at the grass I trod; For I feared to see the whole bare heavens  Filled with the face of God. I struck: the serpentine slow blood  In four arms soaked the moss  Before me, by the living Christ,  The blood ran in a cross. Therefore I toil in forests here  And pile the wood in stacks, And take no fee from the shivering folk  Till I have cleansed the axe. But for a curse God cleared my sight,  And where each tree cloth grow I see a life with awful eyes,  And I must lay it low.
What is war, the destroyer but an appurtenance to the dance? The deadly serious who would have us suppress all exuberance because of it are mad. When terror blooms  leap and twist whirl and prance  that's the show of this the circumstance. We cannot change it not by writing, music neither prayer. Then fasten it on the dress, in the hair to incite and impel. And if dance be the answer, dance! body and mind  substance, balance, elegance! with that, blood red displayed flagrantly in its place beside the face.
Tangled in thought am I, Stumble in speech do I? Do I blunder and blush for the reason why? Wander aloof do I, Lean over gates and sigh, Making friends with the bee and the butterfly? If thus and thus I do, Dazed by the thought of you, Walking my sorrowful way in the early dew, My heart cut through and through In this despair for you, Starved for a word or look will my hope renew; Give then a thought for me Walking so miserably, Wanting relief in the friendship of flower or tree; Do but remember, we Once could in love agree, Swallow your pride, let us be as we used to be.
In the ice-trap of January trees splinter a low sun and the pond's brilliance is glazed to pearl like the eye of the old blind dog. Hares start from furrows to fire the land, their ears small standing shadows, each bone an instrument for listening, each foot on the pulse of the earth. Musk in the brain, the hounds are a parliament of braying. Of all creatures the hare has the largest heart, his blood-volume the greatest. This one outran the pack for a hare's nine lives, and does again through an afternoon when trees sing in ice, and air is opal for three winter hours. I heard of a hare who outran hounds for a day and died of heartburst, found at his death-moment, his arteries full of air-bubbles instead of blood. Or hares on aerodrome runways racing jets. When they cast the torn body away and saved the golden head for the taxidermist's shield, in turn they emptied the horn in The Star, Long Clawson. At Thorpe Satchville the kennelman set bowls before his pets, and rubbed their coats to their usual shining.
Aubrey Bodine's crosswater shot of Menchville, Virginia: a little dream composing a little water, specifically, the Deep Creek flank of the Warwick. Two-man oyster scows lie shoulder to shoulder, as if you walk them, one land to another, no narrow channel hidden in the glossy middle like a blurred stroke, current grinning at hulls. It is an entirely eloquent peace, with lolling ropes and liquid glitter, this vision of traffic and no oystermen in sight. Clearly, Bodine is not Matthew Brady catching the trenchant gropes frozen at Fredericksburg with a small black box. So well has he excluded the neat Mennonite church, yachts, country club pool, the spare smell of dignity seeps. Perhaps it is because of the zoom on the teeth of the oyster tongs; perhaps it is after all Sunday. Above the last boat, the flat-faced store squats at the end of the dirt road as if musing over accounts receivable. No doubt it has weathered years of blood spilling. A spotted hound lifts his nose above what must be yesterday's trash fish, his white coat luminous against deep foliage. What Bodine fails to see is the dog turning to lope uphill under that screen of poplars, behind fat azaleas that hide the county farm and the drunks pressed against wire screens, sniffing the James. One oysterman thumped his noisy wife (the window was accidental) because she had a knife and mourned their boy twenty years drowned. If he knew Bodine stood at the marsh tip where his boy dove, if he were but told a camera yawned to suck in the years of his worst sailing shame, he would turn away. He would whistle up boys in the dust that is dignity and if he could he would spit in his hand and tell his nameless black cellmate there are many men for whom the world is neither oyster nor pearl.
The sky is orange and so is the cat that just ran across the roof  Television antennae cut up her path Everyone has hung up their laundry outside. From our balcony we watch a man pacing in his two room flat shirtless  All he seems to have is a chair, a table, a bed and a television set. But he is abrupt in his movements, almost running back and forth between his two rooms  something is wrong we worry  not wanting to intrude, not  meaning to stare at him so much  When we look away and turn to the right, there's the Palau G&uuml;ell. Sparkling angles tower above the drying clothes the last tourists of the day look back at us. Antoni Gaud&iacute;, we have thought of you all week  But now we turn again to see what the shirtless man is doing he has opened his window  he is leaning out  staring at us  And now, as the orange sky gets darker it's the evening star we wait for, it's the orange cat we want  to see again
the difference between my heart &amp; your intellect, my un disciplined way of doing things (i failed the written driver's test for example) &amp; your science, is the difference between the earth &amp; the snow. the earth wears its colors well. builds them loves them &amp; sticks with them the snow needs no one. it lies there all cold like. it greases behind wolftracks &amp; wingless dead birds. it is a hardship on the poor thinking is its downfall
Another type that England has produced to its sorrow Is the little-boy brilliant. Its mother did something to it at about the age of twelve so it never moved on any more, except mentally, and in mere  stature. It has grown up often a big and often &ldquo;interesting-looking&rdquo; man and &ldquo;quite clever&rdquo; brilliant is the modern word. If you hear a man called brilliant, you may be pretty sure he is   The little-boy of thirty or forty or fifty or sixty. His mind developed at the expense of his male self hypertrophy of the mind, atrophy of the senses. A keen far-reaching curious mind, cynical with little-boy cynicism and destructive in short brilliant. And women fall for these little-boy minds, they feel quite humble  before them. The modern young woman thinks it wonderful to be so brilliant and  destructive She bows quite humble: such a subtle destroying mind must surely be  great! So she marries one of these little-boy brilliants and finds that the subtle destructive cynicism is only a small-boy's  compensation for his own deficiency, most mawkish in its inverted sentimentalism and when she has most unsatisfactorily shared his little-boy bed for  a year or two and born him a son or so, who at the age of seven is so infinitely the  better man of the two, why, the modern young wife of the little-boy brilliant begins to feel  cynical even about cynicism and wonders if a parrot hasn't more to it.
My words that once were virtuous and expressed Nearly enough the mortal joys I knew, Now that I sit to supper with the blest Come haltingly, are very poor and few. Whereof you speak and wherefore the bright walls Resound with silver mirth I am aware, But I am faint beneath the coronals Of living vines you set upon my hair. Angelic friends that stand with pointed wings Sweetly demanding, in what dulcet tone, How fare I in this heaven of happy things,  I cannot lift my words against your own. Forgive the downcast look, the lyre unstrung; Breathing your presence, I forget your tongue.
when I listen hard is bird to bird, wheel on rain, what you say, I say. How tall the pines are! Heads thinned, as though to hear what heaven says through wind. The harder grey falls the brighter grows the dream of light, and wind (like rain that is only heard as it meets our world on water, stone or pane), wind itself a silent thing you think would drown you out well might, but also carries you the more to blow through open windows like my own, in Highgate.
I've looked over the hunter's shoulder seen the otter grab her pup and dive down into her world the plunging spills still water aside bubblesaerationbody's reverberation washing through the mid-deep green under worldstirredfur light flashing amidst planktonair pocketssleeked backflippers hydro planing I've seen the chase  some pursuesome celebrate the fortune of the hunt But I've seen too escape dives of long duration through a world of krill the female'scapable heart aflutterblood pumping to elude the thrashing kill
First that beautiful mad exploration Through a multiple legend of landscape When all roads open and then close again Behind a car that rushes toward escape, The mind shot out across foreign borders To visionary and abrupt disorders. The hills unwind and wind up on a spool; Rivers leap out of their beds and run; The pink geranium standing on the wall Rests there a second, still, and then breaks open To show far off the huge blood-red cathedral Looming like magic against a bright blue sky; And marble graveyards fall into the sea. After the mad beautiful racing is done, To be still, to be silent, to stand by a window Where time not motion changes light to shadow, Is to be present at the birth of creation. Now from the falling chaos of sensation A single image possesses the whole soul: The field of wheat, the telegraph pole. From them the composed imagination reaches Up and down to find its own frontier. All landscapes crystallize and focus here  And in the distance stand five copper beeches.
ACE To want is my only wand. DEUCE Too many adventures. TREY A bridge remembers the future perfectly. FOUR Around the clock a fence to keep grass in. FIVE Stalwart compromises unhinge centuries of neglect Till black men weep. SIX Heavy in your hand a sweater your dead love wore. SEVEN Room for one more the sun said rising. OCHO His casque of gold fall'n over hero's sweaty eyes He condescends to die. NUV Broad hips of a fishing boat graze a groaning wharf. DIX Despair while you still can, wealthy man. JACK I had what I could and it took me in. QUEEN Bare as an inference an ivory mirror in a darkened room. KING Cast off!, he cried but no one listened and the shore was far.
The sun sinks low into the west; The weary toilers hies for rest; The birds have sheltered in their nest.  Good-night! good-night. The hour is calm, the zephyrs still; I hear the singing whip-poor-will; Her music echoes 'mong the hill.  Good-night! good-night. A throng of beetles fill the air; The fire flies' lamp a brilliant glare; From whence they've flown I know not where.  Good-night! good-night. And gazing on this scene I trow, At night fall when the sun is low. The breeze so calm and gently blow  Good-night! good-night. As darkness veils the nightly hour, Faint grows the dying daylight's power, And close the calyx of the flower.  Good-night! good-night. Deep in my heart a small voice say, A doom shall fall thee as this day, And all thy friends shall to thee say,  Good-night! good-night.
The water-flag and wild cane grow Round banks whereon the sunbeams sow Ephemeral gold when, on its shores, The wind sighs through the sycamores. In one green angle, just in reach, Between a willow-tree and beech, Moss-grown and leaky lies a boat The thick-grown lilies keep afloat. And through its waters, half-awake, Slow swims the spotted water-snake; And near its edge, like some gray streak, Stands gaunt the still fly-up-the-creek. Between the lily-pads and blooms The water-spirits set their looms, And weave the lace-like light that dims The glimmering leaves of under limbs. Each lily is the hiding-place Of some dim wood-thing's elvish face, That watches you with gold-green eyes Where bubbles of its breathing rise. I fancy, when the waxing moon Leans through the trees and dreams of June; And when the black bat slants its wing, And lonelier the green-frogs sing; I fancy, when the whippoorwill In some old tree sings wildly shrill, With glow-worm eyes that dot the dark,  Each holding high a firefly spark, To torch its way, the wood-imps come: And some float rocking here; and some Unmoor the lily-leaves and oar Around the old boat by the shore. They climb through oozy weeds and moss; They swarm its rotting sides and toss Their firefly torches o'er its edge Or hang them in the tangled sedge. The boat is loosed. The moon is pale. Around the dam they slowly sail. Upon its bow, to pilot it, A jack-o'-lantern flame doth sit. Yes; I have seen it all in dreams: Naught is forgotten naught, it seems  The strangled face, the matted hair, Drown'd, of the woman trailing there.
By that evening window where His accurate eye keeps Woburn Square Under perpetual judgment so That only the happy can come and go About these gardens and not be Tested in that dark neutrality, Which, in between love and disgust, Hates most of all its own mistrust, I see this gentle and gothic man Tame Apollyon with a pen. I never know the juggernauts Go bulldozing through my thoughts So that everything I own Is trod down and overthrown Without remembering that worse Than thunder in the hearse Is the supernatural sigh Of illusions as they die  But in the rooms of Eliot The visions whistle as they rot. To him the dead twig in the gutter Cries across all law to utter Confidences that would bring Tears to the eyes of anything. But that set imperial face Has looked down on our disgrace And, without betraying so Little as a twinge of sorrow, Seen all grief begin again  A gentle and long-suffering man. Outside the huge negations pass Like whirlwinds writing on the grass Inscriptions teaching us that all The lessons are ephemeral; But as the huge negations ride And depredate all things outside His window, he puts out his hand And writes with whirlwinds on the ground Asseverations that tame The great negations with his name.
The brotherhood is not by the blood certainly, But neither are men brothers by speech by saying so: Men are brothers by life lived and are hurt for it. Hunger and hurt are the great begetters of brotherhood: Humiliation has gotten much love: Danger I say is the nobler father and mother. Those are as brothers whose bodies have shared fear Or shared harm or shared hurt or indignity. Why are the old soldiers brothers and nearest? For this: with their minds they go over the sea a little And find themselves in their youth again as they were in Soissons and Meaux and at Ypres and those cities: A French loaf and the girls with their eyelids painted Bring back to aging and lonely men Their twentieth year and the metal odor of danger. It is this in life which of all things is tenderest  To remember together with unknown men the days Common also to them and perils ended: It is this which makes of many a generation  A wave of men who having the same years Have in common the same dead and the changes. The solitary and unshared experience Dies of itself like the violations of love Or lives on as the dead live eerily: The unshared and single man must cover his Loneliness as a girl her shame for the way of Life is neither by one man nor by suffering. Who are the born brothers in truth? The puddlers Scorched by the same flame in the same foundries, Those who have spit on the same boards with the blood in it, Ridden the same rivers with green logs, Fought the police in the parks of the same cities, Grinned for the same blows, the same flogging, Veterans out of the same ships, factories, Expeditions for fame: the founders of continents: Those that hid in Geneva a time back, Those that have hidden and hunted and all such  Fought together, labored together: they carry the Common look like a card and they pass touching. Brotherhood! No word said can make you brothers! Brotherhood only the brave earn and by danger or Harm or by bearing hurt and by no other. Brotherhood here in the strange world is the rich and Rarest giving of life and the most valued, Not to be had for a word or a week's wishing.
birds the warmest blood in the world keeps hopping powerful breath a ground target while brooding the positions man's growthprecarious birth to soar in the mind so big to the earth wholeparting activewake all the dimensions a great head of
You can scarcely grant me now What was already granted In bland self-deprivation Only to other debtors To whom you owed nothing. And had I cause for complaint After my honest absence That for seven long years I never dared insist That you should keep faith? Now in reward for waiting, Being still a mere nobody, Let me plead without reproach As a less than robber That I am owed nothing.
The drawings were abstract, Delicate Like Japanese calligraphy. When the painter de Kooning Was shown them, he said, &ldquo;Interesting. Not done by a child, I think, Or if so, an extraordinary child.&rdquo; &ldquo;The artist is an elephant, Sir, Named Siri.&rdquo; It had come about That her keeper noticed Her sensitive trunk Drawing designs in the dust. After an argument With the head of the zoo Who laughed at him, The keeper himself Brought large sheets of paper And boxes of charcoal And laid them at Siri's feet. For an hour at a time In happy concentration The elephant created designs Like Japanese calligraphy. What artist's hand As skillful As that sensuous, sensitive trunk?
The big dream is there, and the big ballet is there, but the stage is not big enough to show it. So they suggest it intimately in a circle or in the lap of a square. There is caf&eacute; espresso in the intermission. It is too strong, but it is served by pretty blue-jean girls with pony tails who are maidens of the Method and you are sorry when it is time to carry back in your folding chair.
No sunlight ever. Bleak trees whisper ironies, Carolina duck and Canada goose forget Their world across the water, red geraniums Enhance the chill, dark glasses mirror ironies, The prams are big with doom, the walkers-out forget Why they are out, London is lost, geraniums Stick it out in the wind, old men feel lost But stick it out and refugees forget Pretences and grow sad while ironies Frill out from sprinklers on the green veneer That screens the tubes in which congested trains Get stuck like enemas or ironies Half lost between the lines while dachshunds run Like centipedes and no one knows the time Whatever foreigners ask it. Here is Sunday: And on the seventh day He rested. The Tree Forgets both good and evil in irony.
I turn to my Rand McNally Atlas. Europe appears right after the Map of the World. All of Italy can be seen page 9. Half of Chile page 29. I take out my ruler. In global perspective Italy amounts to less than half an inch. Chile measures more than an inch and a quarter of an inch. Aproximately Chile is as long as China is wide: Back to the Atlas: Chunk of China page 17. All of France page 5: As we say in New York: Who do France and Italy know at Rand McNally? I see the four mountains in Chile higher than any mountain of North America. I see Ojos del Salado the highest. I see Chile unequivocal as crystal thread. I see the Atacama Desert dry in Chile more than the rest of the world is dry. I see Chile dissolving into water. I do not see what keeps the blue land of Chile out of blue water. I do not see the hand of Pablo Neruda on the blue land. As the plane flies flat to the trees below Brazil below Bolivia below five thousand miles below my Brooklyn windows and beside the shifted Pacific waters welled away from the Atlantic at Cape Horn La Isla Negra that is not an island La Isla Negra that is not black is stone and stone of Chile feeding clouds to color scale and undertake terrestial forms of everything unspeakable. In your country how do you say copper for my country? Blood rising under the Andes and above the Andes blood spilling down the rock corrupted by the amorality of so much space that leaves such little trace of blood rising to the irritated skin the face of the confession far from home: I confess I did not resist interrogation. I confess that by the next day I was no longer sure of my identity I confess I knew the hunger. I confess I saw the guns. I confess I was afraid. I confess I did not die. What you Americans call a boycott of the junta? Who will that feed? Not just the message but the sound. Early morning now and I remember <> English poem, I remember from the difficulties of the talk an argument athwart the wine the dinner and the dancing meant to welcome you you did not understand the commonplace expression of my heart: <> <> Early morning: Do you say  But then we lose the idea of the sky uncurling to the light: <> the rose we left behind broken to a glass of water on the table at the restaurant stands even sweeter <>
&ldquo;Please, Please, Please&rdquo; on the charts permits Four canary yellow sequined suits And a hulking Coupe de Ville bought on credit  For the Alabama-Georgia roadhouse circuit. Half last night they drove from Athens, taking turns At the wheel. The radio hissed National Guards In Little Rock, static filling Jackie Wilson's &ldquo;Lonely Teardrops.&rdquo; Parked near Macon in a soybean field, They sleep with heads in towels to protect Their kingly pompadours, and as the pre-dawn Mist burns off, they wake to knocks against The windshield. A cruiser with its siren on Dyes the fog bright red.  A billy club, a face, the windshield breaks.
What reveries of far-off days these withered plaques of duck-weed raise! The creeping wretches, the crowded Pond, a Death-in-Life, no Culture, no Beyond; Light and No-light in dull routine; Thought and No-thought two shades of green; the fair ideals all creatures need smothered beneath th'inferior weed, since highest Aspirations stop, for tadpoles, at the water-top! O Faery Metamorphosis, for Being to become What-Is! Here ceaseless radiance fills my Sphere, The Lamp my Moon, all night, bright, near. And clustering on the crystal wall great Strawberries, iconistical. No strife to propagate the Kind, but leisure to improve the Mind! Yet curious sensations range about the tail, and hint at change. The weed with flowers stars the sky and monstrous Forms sweep dimly by. Tail fades! the vestiges of gills swell with rare Aether from the hills which Time reared up in rocky crests where flaming Fowl involve their nests; whilst in the valleys pipers play <>
I love the many dialects of smoke, leaf smoke and pipe smoke, chimney smoke, the way in spite of gravity it always rises, as if it were assembling in some pungent niche of heaven. I used to love the smoke rings you blew, those insubstantial lassos of desire that roped me in. Now I love woodsmoke and kitchen smoke the breath of soup lifting from the pot, contrails of morning toast, barely burning. Consider the signals the Indians sent  that first skywriting, or how all fires give up the ghost in veils, in clouds like parachutes ascending. I love the way from every household hearth a genie spirals up a helix of its own making. And we walk home, watching the smoke our breath makes on the wintry air, not noticing our days, our nights going slowly up in smoke.
To speak of my influences: Above all, your eyes, And next, that jar of the bell When I think it is you who call. Since half the time it is not, I have fevers to quell. To speak as well Of the rain in the night We suddenly heard lying there, That satin'd stress of a crazy wine Silverly beating down. That music, too, you played  Or was it your &eacute;lan, Dense and rich? A sea-clashed mist Warred with the wracked pulse That danced my blood to flame Plagued by certain notes Of irritable brilliance and flutes Velvet-mouthed. Ah, monotone Of phrases faded into dissolution! Dazed, credulous, I lived Unbalanced by such powers As ruled me like that speech you played And rain's metallic waterfalls. They ruled me, yes. Eyes kissed by eyes And ears stunned by the delicacy Of that fire-in-the-straw art Wished no more than to be Set once more alight. To speak of my influences: By force of fate, you said, Who came with masks, imported more When the suave cords were twanged, Increased the speed at which it wound Its flaunting silk of sound. O heresy! All changes Save this art at which we play, The instant, drenched in rain, We imitated once again But have we the cunning to Keep enthrallment vined? Straw-in-the-fire love, It's no morality play we're in, Nor can we trick time Nor end where we began. Let us end as we will While I make apostrophes That will not more excel Than your eyes, our dance, And we'll love on by chance.
Sweet child amid the apple boughs, How tenderly life looks on thee! And Mother Nature brings her gifts, Yes, e'en the loveliest that may be, To tempt thy innocent regard. How blue the heavens smile above! How crimson is the rose's depth! How beaming is the glance of love, Resting on thee, thou sportive fay; Thou learnst new lessons 'mid the leaves; All golden-lettered is the page The flitting sunbeam deftly weaves. Do fairies hang their glow-worm lamps To light thy path adown the dell? And does the lily in the vale, To thee ring soft her magic bell? The violet, and what brings she To scatter o'er thy charm&egrave;d way? Delicious perfume; and the lark Prolongs his note to cheer thy day. There is a radiance in thine eyes That well disarms all vague unrest; Thou hast few yearnings undefined, Thy childish griefs are soon confessed. Prayer in thy soul is simple trust, And love is all thy life, sweet child! The woodbird's song is not more free, His artless lays more undefiled Than thine. Thy sunny countenance Is naught save gladness, yet we know The thoughtful years come on apace; After Spring's green, the Winter's snow. And for thee, tender one, we ask That when the hours of trial near, As come they must, undaunted thou Wilt dare to meet them without fear. And that the dew within thy soul, Of innocence and rev'rent love, May be as fresh as now, until Thou wear'st a crown of light above.
goodby Betty,don't remember me pencil your eyes dear and have a good time with the tall tight boys at Tabari' s,keep your teeth snowy,stick to beer and lime, wear dark,and where your meeting breasts are round have roses darling,it's all i ask of you  but that when light fails and this sweet profound Paris moves with lovers,two and two bound for themselves,when passionately dusk brings softly down the perfume of the world (and just as smaller stars begin to husk heaven)you,you exactly paled and curled with mystic lips take twilight where i know: proving to Death that Love is so and so.
Spiral Death The snake must be  Yet he's never Murdered me. Fanged death The tiger, too  But has he ever Murdered you? More dangerous death Man indeed Who often kills When there's no need. For man will kill Animal or you  For strife, for sport, Or just a stew.
Up ahead, beyond a rising foreground that is going green to umber, beyond the inconclusive screen of barely feathered branches, riders stream as silently as moths along the roadway toward an amber streetlight. They look as if they are riding into sunset, but it is the sun- set of stage light, worn and fallow, soft and compelling as the light in theatrical backyards, those places where the failed father walks after the last session with his broken son, in which he has admitted, finally and too late, that he betrayed him. From willows near the light stream complex wisped branches that are as delicate as the stems of flowers. The wind takes them softly in soft hands, and sets them swaying, like the childhood swing that continues to sway in the empty backyard, after it is all over, after the father, who does not know any more now than before, but who has come at last to a disaster he can't evade, does the next, last thing, after we, in that brocaded moment when the final action has already occurred  but before the saving house-lights go up lie collapsed in exhaustion, in which we see our own betrayal, that is not fearful or overargued now, but complete, and strangely comfortable. For a moment, as the thin stars begin their explanation of night, as the birds give up their crossed cries so abruptly, as if a drape has fallen I wonder about a fate, or whatever it is that describes the linkage of a life drawn tight and inevitable, that can snatch a man up, like a father worn out by his stumbling, and carry him; and I wonder if this could really happen to us, and if our argument against, or defiance of this, has no substance or if it has, if it is already too late so that time, and what we have learned, is preserved and carried forth, is  dying on the water of the mind, the sunset dying on a theater wall, the aged actor who, already in memory, moves still, with the earnest collapsed delicacy of the convicted, toward his death.
Now strike up a concert of action in the electric nest In which the lighted eyes of deadly engines Never doubt or admire And the copper fire of defenders Shows no sign of doubt or double desire. This is no place for drugs or drink Or human fright (The one defectible link Capable of pity or question Is the no-lone intelligence: let it lie Discarded like an undershirt. Let it sleep in the glue of seconal Although it moan and dream That its inconsequential cities die.) Let everybody sleep in the same glue. But the machine Will stand out trim because it likes All the numbers of the strong white spikes. Its knowledge is alert all night In this sweet chocolate spring Calculating secrets for the moving City of thunderbolts. It feeds the million fueled implement. Its dials smile. It loves the heavy beast The enemy, who when our hemisphere is dark Dares to lay open the abundant womb Of war, and mark Us for the storm and the fire-feast. Let there indeed be a concert of action In the electric lucky dream When every man can violate the earth in sleep And if he wakes may seem Innocent as his lovable machine. But no, one rotten wheel remains,  Man to be taken apart. He is remembered and construed By the magnetic engine; and its art Can never forget. If it decide That man is hesitant again, and tossing in his dream (Reading the reasons of the wrong side) Then the command will follow And the hum be heard tonight Of the immaculate beeline: The drone of the butcher. Thus one enduring light Cancels the last mistake and gives itself thanks That there can never be a failure Within the plastic memory of such a future.
As night drew on, around the quiet stream The wildflower heads leaned closer, and the trees Muttered a little, as if half in dream; And through the wood, trailing sweet robes, a breeze,  Like some dim elfin gathering perfume,  Faltered a moment ere it sank in gloom. Then all was still except that one small stone Protested, whimpering, in the water's way; Petulant, resistant, where the cascade shone, Wrapping its tumult in a gown of spray, Like some pale mother who would put to rest Her child, a starbeam brooching her bright breast. More careful of the nest upon its arm, That hugged the wild-bird, seemed each bush and tree: And in its heart, securing it from harm, Each wildflower seemed to clasp more close its bee: And even Earth with more protection seemed To hide the things that in her bosom dreamed. Save for the stream, to which the hush gave heed, And little winds that sighed and, whispering, rose, And donned their rustling robes with infant speed, Tiptoe, regardful of the wood's repose, The night was still. And then, as if aware That all was ready, radiance filled the air. Godiva-like, the moon rode into sight, Cautions, yet confident that no one sees; The naked moon, astonishing the night, Brightening the thoroughfares of all the trees: Holding her course unfaltering and sure, Knowing herself as beautiful as pure.
Chickadees and finches vie for the feeder that leans against the window. They veer and swoop, each landing tricky, then fly, casting off chirrups and scratches and a  as their weight displaced the feeder waddles and the pane vibrates; their weight almost enough to make a racket. And such a commotion of seed: millet, cracked corn, oat; the birds beak it by in search of sunflower, and it clatters down on the mourning doves, stolid ground patrols on constant watch for seed with one eye then another  in nodding, attentive no's, like matrons disapproving but contented. Their throaty  the room where I sat for many months trying to recover, though recover what I rarely wondered, I'd floated so far from myself a swimmer who's drawn out by currents and depths while the beach recedes, and human shapes grow minuscule  so far I no longer even looked back, but waited it out, each swell an ordeal, like the time alone in deep sea when, weakening, I saw two figures rise beneath me, human sized, ghostly pale and banking like birds: sea turtles, ancient and free. Then swimming in seemed easy. But these birds at their lively, persistent work, I watched all that winter, and while no moment occurred when I knew, now you'll survive, since I didn't know I was in danger, I busied myself in their noise and society: the cardinal with his
inside his Cantos like a pal- ace ten times larger than Ver- sailles so many rooms so many corridors the phalanx of par- ticulars and those long gal- leries with their endless vis- tas of a past that no one else has seen so well or understood so well the mirrors that re- flect into each other making the rhymes between ideas yes it is the father's house of many mansions with its place for each of us places for all.
The rose did not appear to my eyes. Hours later I almost choke with desire. She was a shadow on a bright street, jangling her keys, playing with the idea  worlds she could open. She could feel me, as our steps paced in parallel. The street became a bright river and my voice could have drifted across, a gentle inquiry. &ldquo;Would you like some company?&rdquo; while the houses of the middle class baked in the sun. No harm. And yet a new love might have been created. As it was, I watched her disappear, her regret something she told me with hips. Ah, we could scream, we tongue-tied lovers. Hours later we could scream some more.
I am a poet's pipe, The modernistic kind, Not a churchwarden type But elegantly lined. Straight stem and simple bowl, No grinning Gothic skull, Nor Chinese rigmarole, Nor buxom Turkish trull. I read him like a book (e.g., I know just where He got this poem. Look In the pages of Corbi&egrave;re.) &ldquo;Cast off!&rdquo; he shouts. &ldquo;Full steam!&rdquo; Aye, aye. I'm burning red. Life is a waking dream Until he goes to bed. His devils in dark swarms Fly from my smoking spout. Bright, intellectual forms Are hovering about. And then his light goes out.
Out, sceptic, betrayed by your own style: No faith and loose measures go hand in hand. Call grandeur untrue, but truth is grand, And truth no man can alter, no, nor defile. Sprung from infinite sorrow breaks the smile Of grace, altering the path ambition planned, Whose joy, given, must unforgettably stand, Relaxed order, charm, for none to revile. Learn then of love, shine from the truth men shun. Build, soul, your city, honour the state Innocence gave to wisdom, there made one. Joy singing governs all we create As weir waters, feeling the Earth rotate, Amass, falling, a music always begun.
If you know about the Babylonian Jews coming back to their stone houses in Jerusalem, and if you know how Ben Franklin fretted after the fire on Arch Street, and if you yourself go crazy when you walk through the old shell on Stout's Valley Road, then you must know how I felt when I saw Stanley's Cafeteria boarded up and the sale sign out; and if you yourself mourned when you saw the back wall settling and the first floor gone and the stairway gutted then you must know how I felt when I saw the iron fence and the scaffold and the plastic sheets in the windows.  Don't go to California yet! Come with me to Stanley's and spend your life weeping in the small park on 106th Street. Stay with me all night! I will give you breast of lamb with the fat dripping over the edges; I will give you the prophet of Baal making the blood come. Don't go to California with its big rotting sun and its oleanders; I will give you Sappho preparing herself for the wind; I will give you Mussolini sleeping in his chair; I will give you Voltaire walking in the snow.  This is the dark green bench where I read Yeats, and that is the fountain where the Deuteronomist sat with his eyes on the nymph's stomach. I want you to come here one more time before you go to California; I want you to see the Hotel Regent again and the Edison Theater and the Cleopatra Fruit Market. Take the iron fence with you when you go into the desert. Take Voltaire and the Deuteronomist and the luscious nymph. Do not burn again for nothing. Do not cry out again in clumsiness and shame.
The shiny pictures go straight through my eyes, But nothing in them adds up to a view. I feel that I must push those leaves away, That if I stare enough I'll come to know The secrets of the road, the blurry trees And that small figure staring straight ahead, Dressed in the black and white of photograph, Walking quite briskly; nothing in his face To tell me what on earth he's thinking of. Tin-helmeted and holstered at his side Two soldiers elbow him like special friends, The kind who chew gum, warn you out of harm. I watch them lead him to the proper place Then level off their rifles, take their aim And squeeze their gentle triggers with big hands. His body loose, cords crossed upon his chest, Earth gazing greyly at his nodded head, His blindfold white, his jacket creased on blood  This is how people go to being dead: Their glasses taken off, backed-up to posts. Quisling, Fifth-Columnist ... the sense of it Is hidden in what papers always say; But that's not much about the bits of cloud, The nothingness, cold happenings, more sky. I turn back to the start, and let the flat And boring ground, the figures, trees and road Go sliding by to their appointed ends, Which are no ends, but dark re-surfacings Of eyes, and guns, and gentle-seeming hands From thick old pages, heaviness like lead.
Well is it, shrouded Sun, thou spar'st no ray To illumine this sad street! A light more bare Would but discover more this bald array Of roofs dejected, window patched that stare From sordid walls: for the shy breath of Spring, Her cheek of flowers, or fragrance of her hair, Thou could'st not, save to cheated memory, bring. Alas! I welcome this dull mist, that drapes The path of the heavy sky above the street, Casting a phantom dimness on these shapes That pass, by toil disfeatured, with slow feet And with mistrustful eyes; though in the mud Children the play of ages old repeat, Because of quenchless wanting in their blood. Yet oh, what clouds of heaviness deter My spirit; what sad vacancy impedes! I am like some far-ventured traveller, Whom, in a forest vast, entangled weeds Have hindered; over whom green darkness fills The inextricable boughs and stifling feeds A poisonous fear, that sinks on him and chills. Nor finds he faith, amid the monstrous trees Rooted in silence, peopled with strange cries And stealthy shadows (where alone he sees Rank growths of the hot marsh, but watching eyes Imagines), to believe the self-same bark He leans on, lifts to the unclouded skies Its crest victorious from that cradle dark. I with like pain and languor am opprest: Me too a forest upon poison fed, Me too the marsh and the rank weeds infest. Almost I trace in the dumb pall o'erhead A net of stubborn boughs that dimly mesh The air; I stifle: like a chain of lead They weigh upon my soul, they bind my flesh. I cannot breathe: the last and worst despair Begins to invade me, numbing even desire That panted for sweet draughts of light and air. Dumb walls against me with blind heaven conspire: Incredible the sun seems now, a ghost I dreamed of in my dreams; unreal fire. The light is blotted out, the blue is lost. Was it mirage, the glow I fancied warm On human cheeks, the beauty of my kind? I feel it fading from me, a brief charm Flying at touch. Strike hither, strong sun, to my dulled heart's core! Awake, disturb me, lest mine eyes grow blind, By fatal use to a foul dream resigned, Accept for Nature's body this, her sore.
It was a lack of faith. I admit it. I didn't believe enough in you or even in the power of my song. I needed constant reassurance. Yes, I saw how the Furies wept as I sang slower, softer Time stopped for me  still, I didn't think they'd let you go. I didn't think you'd be free to follow me. And so I looked back wondering:  I've caught the snake that killed you I keep him alive. He's become a sort of pet  such a small viper, and so supple  my last connection to you. And his brightness: eyes, skin how he shimmers in the sun keeps me alert and reminds me at times of your brightness: the sun in your hair, the jewels around your neck. At first, of course, I thought of revenge. I thought of hurting the snake,  of throwing him into a fire. But I hesitated and now I've grown fond of him. Once when I stood singing by the cliffs a sharp stone fell and then a lizard darted to the east and her sliced-off tail rushed away to the west and I watched the tail shudder and jerk  a yellow-green thing in such a hurry. Now I've become a torn-off lizard's tail. Only my tongue lives in my bodiless head my tongue still sings against the noise of the river. Maybe this is what I really wanted: To be just a tongue  a lizard's tail without the lizard. To be a pure voice without my tired, awkward body  Now I'm almost weightless and about to be swallowed by the ocean I will become  a stronger voice.
<> <> the once-upon-a-time. Barely July and the boardwalk already blamed the sun for frayed and steaming seaweed, the softer points like soap where rain and salt, our feet, had kneaded down the wood. A blue note on a saxophone traveled from someone's radio, bent to skate on air almost, almost to kiss your ear: nothing I'd ever do. I said I'd hold that shell to mine to listen for the fable; you said borrowed sound was counterfeit, one hand held to my lips. The sky would steal an ocean's roar to make its rollers sigh for you, paint a summer beach with snow to make it marry you. The glazed impasto of <> with styrofoam and crushed Coke cans, obscene in the five o'clock light of that ocean riffling its pages to reach the end of these particulars.  <> tossed out by your retreating back),  <> and drowning all his young life. Water by water I'll take myself back, the boat for burning only.
Mr. White Man, White Man, How can it be, You sleep with my sister, Yet you won't shake hands with me? Miss White Lady, Lady, Tell me, if you can, Why you hard-work my mother, Yet take my brother for your man? White Man, White Lady, What's your story, anyway? You love me in the night time And hate me in the day. Dixie, Dixie, Dixie, What make you do me like you do? <> <>
Every day in a little way things are done. Every morning there is a day. Every day there is a day. Waking up in a bed with a window with light, with a place in mind, to piss, to eat, to think of something, to forget it all, to remember everything, perfectly, each specific, actual detail, knowing nothing, having no sense of any of it, not being a part of it, all right for you, all right, you guys  echoes, things, faces.
These homes in poems   how large they were. Upwards and sideways. How they housed  in sun and gloom, those loved unloving fathers' ghosts  mothers medicinal as scents that drifted in from trees  with unusual names. These homes had attics, tea-chests.  Country or cathedral views woodsmoke like epitaphs  scrawled indelibly on air. Air was always resident.  Charged with the many duties loss imposes on a habitation  whose owners are elsewhere. (Air must don its apron, dust  shafts of light, shake out camphor and cobweb, breathe  rings on the bell.) Above all there was singing. As if the mind  had climbed to its highest landing, from an upstairs room  someone's voice. And the house rose only  that this voice should be embodied, bulwarked against  wind by walls, rooted in nursery furniture, friendships  only flyleaves know married to its elements, skeleton  and soul and carried downstairs.
Or Captain Philip Sheridan, quartermaster, getting siege guns to New Madrid Or that the average age of the 100,000 soldiers at Shiloh must have been 18&ndash;19 That maybe Sidney Johnston purposely let himself bleed to death, he had made such a mess of Donelson That one has to upset things, to get at them, that you do have to turn the ground under. Or up, is it? That faces were once unique, each one looked like itself, it was not Bell Telephone executives, all up from the ranks. That a face ought to fit who wears it, not belong to the company (Selig Smith, 4th Indiana, died with a locket and the other man cut off some of Booth's hair, so that it was Booth his mother might say. The way even proof was particular One has this difficulty, nowadays, that the faces are obvious even when they're open. It's as though an idea was lost: that you can't do any more than you are. And therefore you are. It's as though you really had secrets. One secret. That you go in there on the assumption the other guy is the one who's going to get it And you find out, you did. You look at yourself in the mirror The mirror is a civil war
For a month (a minute) I lived in sight of two mountains. One was a sheer bastion of pale rock. &lsquo;A rockface,&rsquo; one says, without thought of features, expression  it's an abstract term. But one says, too, &lsquo;a stony-faced man,&rsquo; or &lsquo;she maintained a stony silence.&rsquo; This mountain, had it had eyes, would have looked always past one or through one; its mouth, if it had one, would purse thin lips, implacable, ceding nothing, nothing at all. The other mountain gave forth a quite different silence. Even (beyond my range of hearing) it may have been singing. Ravines, forests, bare rock that peaked, off-center in a sharp and elegant cone or horn, had an air of pleasure, pleasure in being. At this one I looked and looked but could devise no ruse to coax it to meet my gaze. I had to accept its complete indifference, my own complete insignificance, my self unknowable to the mountain as a single needle of spruce or fir on its distant slopes, to me.
Pray you young woman come to my bed clean And that your lover's dregs be drained away. Come not quickly but leave time in between. I'm old and waitful, I can stand delay Better than that too clearly you'd betray My doting. True. Sweetheart, you must be mean A little, devious and deceitful, and not say You come from him I'll know. Just go, obscene As ever you wish, play the long bright day With his young body; then come, draw night's screen Over me, pleasure me, let my decay Be hidden. For your hands can touch gangrene And make it seem like my green springtime still In perjury and mercy if you will.
It's fine to wake up and hug your knees my knees when I have run out of fire fluid I rush back to bed the feeling of paws on my knees petals and wings little hair, why have you gone I sing that in my head being alone is a song a cigarette in bed it's better not to touch the ceiling but if love attaches a band-aid from the ceiling to your head there's nothing to do but recognize it.
Farmworker-feet first Amputated from the spade ... Nothing now Of the warm colour-drizzle to soak The dryness of their eyes. Clamour of bell-metal Moulted into satanic tanks Smashed their fine spine-steel Into grenades. Infiltrated lungs are Marched through by gasping froth-fiends And whole Siberias were interned In their gentle brains. These are the ones Whose mothers received just something back At the customs-post of more human pits Where now all kinds of Stammering Christs are Calcifying into one, till the bacchanalia Of death-rattles mounts up into a Terror-sermon on the mount. On their missing arms The breadwinning palm is fixed as a fist, It sears their heart, it rings out The advent of Peace.
One side tight in the case, scope screwed on my head, brown stock like my owner unfiring, prepared; bought from deadly shot who went berserk in Newport, I crept into Oakland in a back seat of a friend who later gave up games with dumdum shell in his temple but I was sleeping on this top shelf cuddled from explosion. You want to borrow me for a hunt in Kenai, and uncased I loosen my handle sight off center tightening my strap on your blade of flesh I will hold on long treks through berries where the moose lie. I go back to sleep carried over frontiers of clothing I lie among, my master's grandfather naked on the firing range, his blue hat broken at brim; and know I will awaken decades from here, waiting for answers that never speak to me, cartridges of an enemy part stranger, greased, armpit anchored, waiting for the burned flit of hair trigger pulled toward the closet, these skeletons I wear.
<> Whether you come or go, Whether you find me fair As pale thorn drifting slow. In a child's sweet, tired way, I think tonight I shall rest; Not rise in the dark to pray, Beating my empty breast. Tonight I shall not mind Where you may rest your head, Whatever place you find Among the quiet dead. Tonight I shall not weep Into the wind's dark breath, Knowing you are asleep Under the eaves of death.
When news came that your mother'd smashed her hip, both feet caught in rungs of the banquet table, our wedding rebroken on the memory of the long lake of silence when the stones of her body broke as an Irish fence of stones, I see your wet dugs drag with the weight of our daughter in the quick of her sleep to another feeding. I pick you up from the floor of your ringing fears, the floor where the photographs you have worked cool into the sky of the gray you love, and you are back at the compost pile where the vegetables burn, or swim in the storm of your childhood, when your father egged you on with his open machinery, the exhaust choking your sisters, and your sisters choked still. Now the years pile up on themselves, and his voice stops you in accusation, in the eggs of your stretched sons, one born on his birthday, both dead. I pull you off into the sanctuary of conciliation, of quiet tactics, the uttered question, the referral, which will quiet the condition you have seen in your mother's shadow, the crutches inching in the uncut grass, and the worn body you will carry as your own birthmark of his scream.
My New Year's drink is mulled to-night  And hot sweet vapours roofward twine. The shades cry   As down they troop to taste old wine. They crowd about the crackling fire,  Impatient as the rites begin; Mulled porto is their souls' desire   Porto well aged with nutmeg in. &lsquo;Ha,&rsquo; cries the first, &lsquo;my Alma wine  Of one-and-seventy years ago!&rsquo; The second cheers &lsquo;God bless the vine!&rsquo;  The third and fourth like cockerels crow: They crow and clap their arms for wings,  They have small pride or breeding left  Two grey-beards, a tall youth who sings,  A soldier with his cheek-bone cleft. <>  That whiffled like a candle smoke, Now fixed and ruddy with the grape  And mirrored in the polished oak. I watch their brightening boastful eyes,  I hear the toast their glasses clink: &lsquo;May this young man in drink grown wise  Die, as we also died, in drink!&rsquo; Their reedy voices I abhor,  I am alive at least, and young. I dash their swill upon the floor:  Let them lap grovelling, tongue to tongue.
The delicate company of telegraph wires Frailly banded together, Progressing on their tall stilts Up hill and down dale Endlessly on And on ... The road, Slight ribbon clinging Closely to the earth's crust, Sedulously and obediently following its eccentricities, Hesitating at times at an obstacle, Fastidiously skirting a pitfall, Wavering but never retreating, Bravely surmounting whatever it meets, And going endlessly on And on ... Twin stips of steel Drawn thin but strong, Clean-cut, Across the cross-strips of the sleepers, Casting a firm even shadow On the counter-pattern of wood: Less obedient, more obstinate than the road, Subjugating, levelling, Leaving a smooth green hill Sliced like a cake With deep brown wound clean-edged, Flinging a rampart across a gulf, Leaping a river, Undermining a mountain, Its slim parallels going Endlessly on And on ... Earth, Man has meshed you, Netted you with his net, Criss-crossed you across and across, Patterned you according to his wish, Subjected you to compass and set-square! And you too, sea, he has patterned, Plotting algebraic routes Whose furrows efface themselves, Leaving no indent  A more impermanent geometry. And you, air  In your cartography He is still diffident, Has as yet but traced upon you One or two desultory diagrams, A few tentative strokes!
You will recognize your brothers by the way they act and move throughout the world. there will be a strange force about them, there will be unspoken answers in them. this will be obvious not only to you but to many. the confidence they have in themselves and in their people will be evident in their quiet saneness. the way they relate to women will be clean, complimentary, responsible, with honesty and as partners. the way they relate to children will be strong and soft full of positive direction and as example. the way they relate to men will be that of questioning our position in this world, will be one of planning for movement and change, will be one of working for their people, will be one of gaining and maintaining trust within the culture. these men at first will seem strange and unusual but this will not be the case for long. they will train others and the discipline they display will be a way of life for many. they know that this is difficult but this is the life that they have chosen for themselves, for us, for life: they will be the examples, they will be the answers, they will be the first line builders, they will be the creators, they will be the first to give up the weakening pleasures, they will be the first to share love, resources and vision, they will be the workers, they will be the scholars, they will be the providers, they will be the historians, they will be the doctors, lawyers, farmers, priests and all that is needed for development and growth. you will recognize these brothers and they will not betray you.
Bring me to the blasted oak That I, midnight upon the stroke, <> May call down curses on his head Because of my dear Jack that's dead. Coxcomb was the least he said: <> Nor was he Bishop when his ban Banished Jack the Journeyman, <> Nor so much as parish priest, Yet he, an old book in his fist, Cried that we lived like beast and beast: <> The Bishop has a skin, God knows, Wrinkled like the foot of a goose, <> Nor can he hide in holy black The heron's hunch upon his back, But a birch-tree stood my Jack: <> Jack had my virginity, And bids me to the oak, for he <> Wanders out into the night And there is shelter under it, But should that other come, I spit: <>
I will put Chaos into fourteen lines And keep him there; and let him thence escape If he be lucky; let him twist, and ape Flood, fire, and demon his adroit designs Will strain to nothing in the strict confines Of this sweet Order, where, in pious rape, I hold his essence and amorphous shape, Till he with Order mingles and combines. Past are the hours, the years, of our duress, His arrogance, our awful servitude: I have him. He is nothing more nor less Than something simple not yet understood; I shall not even force him to confess; Or answer. I will only make him good.
I'll give you a silver dollar if you'll learn The Creation. Why eyes. Big eyes. My mother had me saying The Gettysburg Address in a boyscout suit. Why didnt you say something else, old man. I never learned by heart, The Creation, and that is the key to all life. I strain now through the mists of other life, to recall that old man's presence. I know we are linked in destiny and cause. I know he my guardian and deepest teacher. I stand on his invisible shoulders. I look for his enemies to tear their throats. I wish that he had told me about J. A. Rogers and <> his Mason Book. Perhaps it would have meant another path. It wda saved some time, some energy, some pain. But love is the answer we keep saying, only love. And in my grandfathers pained eyes I remember only the keen glint of divine magnetism. My grandfather loved me.
<> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <>
What I saw in his head was an inverted vision, and the glass cracked when I put my hand in. My own head is round with hair for adornment, but the face is an ornament. Your face is wide with long hair, and eyes so wide they grow deep as I watch. If the world could only be rounder, like your head, like mine, with your eyes for real lakes! I sleep in myself. That man was a friend, sans canoe, and I wanted to help him.
Alligator steal your blanket off, Sheriffman rip out th' spring; Now don't you worry, mah l'le sof'top, Don't you worry 'bout a thing. <> Honey, don't you fret none! Ah'll fiddle beefstakes down from baldy apples, Scrounge us some purty biskets off th' cloudknees. So hush, you little cabbage-grabber, Iffen you wants me t'be yoh good naybor! Oh hollah log, hollah log, scratch mah lef' leg, Yow hush you to sleep, mah l'le bush of sorrow, hear! An' the very fust thing tomorroh, Ah'll git yoh a little ole awful-smellin' dawg yoh kin keep Until the river turns to burnin' stone And there ain't nobody left to weep  <>
In the nature of flesh, these clown gods are words, blown in the winters, thru windows, lacking sun. In the nature, of ideas, in the nature of words, these clown god's are winter. Are blown thru our windows. The flesh &amp; bone of the season. Each dead thing hustled across the pavement. Each dead word drowned in a winter wind. Are in the nature of flesh. These liars, clown gods
Words I have said in anger or in passion Flicker in memory's darkness like tired birds, Toward midnight identity, recognitions ... I would be masked though I be masked in blood. As if a dog were called and did not come ... Words evoke a love I had thought forgotten. Who can forgive that thoughtless animal? But something scent perhaps he can recall, Packed in his head like letters in a trunk ... The bird flies  Of feathers breaks above his pointing head: A deck awash with other seasons' storms When feathers tickled, only thunder could Explode the seasons when there was no blood. God curse that Judas animal, forgive What out of ignorance is always done.
You, king, die. Mithra. Where was death Hiding for those ten hours when you lay Endowing Lenares with that great red legend? The Monster. Dead. Drag the bright corpse away. Did the sword shriek in his hand? The sand Wept as he fell. You, king, die. The Miura Groaned as he gored his god. But the long Face of a stone and a saint only set surer Into the calm that had always crowned it. You, King, die. The killer with a bull's hair on his belly Goes towering to his death under a cape. Black that Islero honours the place vvhere he fell. O expiation! The king and the bull, kissing, Enter and share a kingdom. The sword and horn Sleep side by side. Justice. You, kings, die. Between this man and this bull a myth is born.
The house had its teeth in her leg. Her sorrow had made a cloud rose and the cloud rose encompassed them. Soon she became it though it was her end. Old mauves fogged the stairs while crimsons sunk in dark corners and streaked them with vaporous skin petals. Cream and scarlet they massed hesitant in every drawer. Papers blurred. The child ate petals. A cloud rose on the horizon of the morning with a plume like the breath of a whale at sea It was the cloud rose whose heavy dew had watered the documents into the earth and the flat men and her fingers fallen to rain In rain-divided air to rise to what she may, and is not said to, be In the air a shadow of a child circled attentively in the cloudless air in the unimaged air in that dry air of no flower I long to breathe
While we sleep mudflats will gleam in moonwane, and mirror earliest wan daybreak in pockets and musselshell hillocks, before a stuttering, through dreams, of lobsterboats going out, a half- awakening, a re- living of ebbing dreams as morning ocean returns to us, a turning from light towards more dreams, intelligence of what pulls at our depths for design. I hear the tide turning. Last eager wave over- taken and pulled back by first wave of the ebb. The pull back by moon-ache. The great knots of moon-awake energy far out.
Take no stock in the friendly words of friends, for in such kindness all their kindness ends; we go our separate ways to death. The love of father or of mother knows the fear of sickness, the need of food and clothes, but otherwise we go our separate ways to death. Kiss after kiss of the head beside you on the cushion, but faithful only in its fashion  we go our separate ways to death. If you would see the phoenix burn and in the traffic hunt a unicorn, well, ride the subway till your death and hold your job till you are out of breath. We heard your jokes, your stories, and your songs, know of your rights and all your wrongs, but we are busy with our own affairs. Sorry? O yes! But after all who cares? You think that you have something still to say? Perhaps. But you are growing old, are growing grey. And we are too. We'll spare another friendly word for you; and go our separate ways to death.
The garden laced green stuff about the two of them,  Soughing, shaking its points of wet light; Under and over, leaf upon quick leaf,  The seasons following, folding them out of sight. And the web shook: quietly, sometimes fiercely,  The branches high-strung over long grass; The back-gate was choked by the Zephirine Drouhin,  It became easy to sit and watch days pass Leaching colour from the deck-chair canvas.  He was unmanned by what had vanished; she, Under the spread and weight of the blue sky,  Set out the bright things for a late tea. One year goldcrests came; another summer  Herons took two fish from the cloudy pond. The gate, the green, the cool rooms had decided  There was no future in looking much beyond Bees in the hyssop, a wild honeysuckle  Cupping its warm crowns against the wall, The mild whispers of things growing, being, dying,  Fingers of light slipping into the front hall Where the house, chastened by wax and cut flowers,  Split all the green to something without a name, The sun and the moon stretched out their warm and pale  On the spare bed to which no visitor came.
<>  Far from the righteous and the ignorant,  The vacant phrases of familiar cant, The trivial loveless women and the low Abortive men, the fashions stale and slow,  The greed of riches and the crime of want! Come! lest contentment dim the quenchless fire,  Come! lest we lose from life the magic spell,  The power of thought, the ceaseless miracle Of day and night, the youth of love's desire. Come! lest we wear the livery, take the hire,  And prove in virtuous platitudes 't is well. Come! lest we take the thralldom and the food,  Accept the hire and kiss the master's hand,  Or hear, obedient to the world's command, Our praises from the Ciceronian &ldquo;good&rdquo;; Or feel the shame of being understood  By those we know can never understand! Earth knows our bodies, heaven our conscious souls!  The world is ignorant of all but name;  Come! let us fear its praise and seek its blame, Take larger motives that ignore its goals, And blow a fire within life's smouldering coals  To scar its social erebus with flame! Come! We can feel, dilate with endless air,  The journeying seas, or watch our Paris take  New moods of laughter, or the sun-God shake, Low down the Nile, the splendour of his hair. Extreme in joy, extreme in soul's despair,  Come! Let us dare to go for sweet life's sake! Life's choice is this: the world or all the rest.  The heights are lonely and the depths are dark;  Haply too weak of soul I miss the mark And fall below the world's unloveliest Level of littleness I say the best Is mine, I venture life's extremest test.  No failures quench the Truth's eternal spark!
How hard it is to say a thing straight with minutes boiling like eggs on the stove. The door is wide open but I don't even move. Out there the dog zig-zags, led by his nose through inaudible light. He will stop forever to stare down a blade of grass. He will say nothing important softly to everything that leaps. The drone of sirens is rising up our hill, a daughter cries somewhere. Inside our anonymous houses we drift back along the deepening blue and uncut grasses of our lives, wanting to move but just looking, just looking  as if far down in those shy blue tunnels a mouth opens, amazed we have come at last, and the right, final word tries to leap over the sudden shoulder of breath.
In June the bush we call alder was heavy, listless, its leaves studded with galls, growing wherever we didn't want it. We cut it savagely, hunted it from the pasture, chopped it away from the edge of the wood. In July, still everywhere, it appeared wearing green berries. Anyway it must go. It takes the light and air and the good of the earth from flowers and young trees. But now in August its berries are red. Do the birds eat them?Swinging clusters of red, the hedges are full of them, red-currant red, a graceful ornament or a merry smile.
My country, O my land, my friends  Am I apart, here from you in a land Where all your gas lights faces, sputum gleam Like something left, forsaken, here am I  And are these stars the high plateau the scents Of Eden and the dangerous tree are these The landscape of confession and if confession So absolution? Wake pines but pines wake here. I dream the too-keen cider the too-soft snow. Where are the bayonets that the scorpion may not grow? Here quakes of earth make houses fall  And all my countrymen I see rush toward one stall. Exile is thus a purgatory not such as Dante built But rather like a blanket than a quilt And I have no decision is it green or brown That I prefer to country or to town? I am unraveled, umbilical anew, So ring the church bells here in Mexico  (They ring too obdurately here to need my call) And what hours they forget to chime I'll know As one whose altitude at one time was not
France like the map of tenderness fell open And green, green were the spreading arteries Where every road was a leafy procession, As poplar, maple, beech in lovely series Opened the way to secret villages. We were the wind, but even wind was slowed As shadows made a river of the road. We welcomed with a deep renewed devotion Those gifts of evening wrapped in return: The absentminded cows moved in slow motion, The sleeping dog did not stir at our horn, The haycart stopped us, bulging to the barn, And red geraniums on each windowsill Warm like a handclasp, and as casual  The immemorial boy fished in a stream While the earth spun its way toward sleep; Old women in the doorways sat to dream, And at the fountain the old horse drank deep; All animals and men were coming home. We drove so fast it might have seemed like fleeing, Yet all we knew was peace and its sweet flowing. And as the moon rose and the mists rose too, Still all we saw was radiance distilled As we rushed down the tree-roads into blue. We were the new world nourished by the old, The wild natural heart gravely fulfilled By France at its most pure that all men bless, O human world, O map of tenderness!
Of the two, one faces one. In the air there is no tremor, no odor. There is a house around them, of wood, of walls. The mark is silence. Everything hangs. As he raises his hand to not strike her, as again his hand is raised, she has gone, into another room. In the room left by her, he cannot see himself as in a mirror, as a feeling of reflection. He thinks he thinks, of something else. All the locked time, all the letting go down into it, as a locked room, come to. This time not changed, but the way of feeling secured by walls and books, a picture hanging down, a center shifted, dust on all he puts his hand on, disorder, papers and letters and accumulations of clothing, and bedclothes, and under his feet the rug bunches.
The sleds of the children Move down the right slope. To the left, hazed in the tumbling air, A thousand lights smudge Within the branches of the old forest, Like colored moons in a well of milk. The sleds of the children Make no sound on the hard-packed snow. Their bright cries are not heard On that strange hill. The youngest are wrapped In cloth of gold, and their scarves Have been dipped in blood. All the others, from the son Of Tegos, who is the Bishop Of Black Church near Tarn, On to the daughter of the last slut, Are garbed in love's shining dress; Naked little eels, they flash Across the amazed ice. And behind each sled There trots a man with his sex Held like a whip in his snaking hand. But no one sees the giant horse That climbs the steps which stretch forth Between the calling lights and that hill Straight up to the throne of God. He is taller than the highest tree And his flanks steam under the cold moon. The beat of his heart shakes the sky And his reaching muzzle snuffles At the most ancient star. The innocent alone approach evil Without fear; in their appointed flame They acknowledge all living things. The only evil is doubt; the only good Is not death, but life. To be is to love. This I thought as I stood while the snow Fell in that bitter place, and the riders Rode their motionless sleds into a nowhere Of sleep. Ah, God, we can walk so easily, Bed with women, do every business That houses and roads are for, scratch Our shanks and lug candles through These caves; but, God, we can't believe, We can't believe in anything. Because nothing is pure enough. Because nothing will ever happen To make us good in our own sight. Because nothing is evil enough. I squat on my heels, raise my head To the moon, and howl. I dig my nails into my sides, And laugh when the snow turns red. As I bend to drink, I laugh at everything that anyone loves. All your damn horses climbing to heaven.
I like love anonymous more than murder incorporated or shall we say South Africa I like the Valentine the heart the power incorruptible but failing body flowers of the world From my death the white man takes new breath he stands as formerly he stood and he commands me for his good he overlooks my land my people in transition transplantations heartsand power beating beating beating beating hearts in transplantation power in transition
Wherever man on earth is found Let him his tribute pay, For he is in all nature bound To bend to God and pray. And every man on earth who dwells In darkness or in light Has in his breast a voice that tells Him that to pray is right. Though but all shadowy and dim Of God the savage reads, No savagery can take from him The knowledge of his needs. So let him pray if but to stone And senseless stock of wood, For in his mercy God will own All motives that are good. But he who knows the heavenly power And feels the heavenly care, Is doubly bound in every hour To breathe some form of prayer. The darkest doubts the soul may fill; Still pray, though doubts be there, For he is safest from all ill Whose lips are moved with prayer. 'Tis best for every one who can To pray with faith devout, But God is gracious in his plan For him beset with doubt. Still pray, for long as any heart, Can feel its deep despair, Not from it can there once depart Efficiency of prayer. And all who strive, and strive and fall In sore besetting sins, Still pray God's love is over all 'Tis prayer on prayer that wins.
Spring is like a perhaps hand (which comes carefully out of Nowhere)arranging a window,into which people look(while people stare arranging and changing placing carefully there a strange thing and a known thing here)and changing everything carefully spring is like a perhaps Hand in a window (carefully to and fro moving New and Old things,while people stare carefully moving a perhaps fraction of flower here placing an inch of air there)and without breaking anything.
And if the cliffs themselves produced the major illusion. Cannot without the sun, the flaming instroke direct and personal, the haystack on the peak. And if the flashing hay could produce the illusion. Cannot without the sea beneath and blue on accurate margin the surfboard boy returned tiny from the Pacific to a fabulous shore. And if the seascape could produce the illusion. Cannot without whole scene : city and oilfield in metal forests to the hills' mirage, Hollywood and the high bare brilliant mountains. Illusion of calm over a minute plain in steepness opened, an overheated landscape familiar in movies and recurrent dreams. O prism of summer and produced illusion: absolute calm.Past newsreel, print, and view, vicarious true images, do you see, over the high-flying plane below you, over the harbor, over the city, over this precipice, do you see hot grass, mile-off counties, fire-surfaced sea, obsessions of sight cliff-hung, as movie, as peace?
Waiting in pain on a subway platform my train doesn't come wrong trains roar by fracturing space what are the facts? I have given up what I wanted to love me. It's raw two men are talking loud it isn't interesting what they say the lights are lurid the facts are harsh but I am quiet with my mortal facts. People have said I am disoriented but I am on this bench where I am with not much left to the middle of my life. Who are you come and stand beside me? you keep me silent company what kind of thing do you want? I look without fear in your neutral face. It isn't true the truth's too hard too hard for what? what's my alternative? The middle, we define, is the passage between the probable and the necessary and the existing is the necessary I love you, Necessary, you are strong and big so I am not afraid of you I do not feel like I am under arrest and shrewd you are to give away your love on the likes of me for I pay back threefold yes! ask any of them how it was loving me, the while they dared.
To proceed: whether results are evident because they're results. Mists from chromeplate parts precipitate ulcers of the skin and cancer. Raw, hard sun becoming stronger. Should I save my pity for myself? Do to others what's been done to you? Unlimited desires at age thirty-seven moved to tears before a rose. It makes sense that the socialist regime enters into a series of contracts with private corporations to produce and market its oil resources. The data actually proves it's difficult to draw conclusions on the fate of the lower middle class. Will the sophora tree maintain its distinctness? Free potatoes, trucked from another state, feeding those reconciled to their doom. Pork fat? Ten to 24 million tons of dust, loss of light north of the equator, temperature drop of 18 to 55 degrees depending on the season. August afternoon velveted with drink, softened yellow; floundering marsh, iron river, blue, heavy air in the bloodstream. Everyone has some, no one has enough, but if you have the will you'll be taken care of. When imported shoes mean the state of the economy isn't prosperous? Water with nothing but a little lemon in it. The woman in bed turning toward her husband drowsing in a chair? You get nothing for nothing and a rat's human as a cat, and the bird with wild open wings creates a counterlight. Cool metallic shimmering on the Avenue. Your eyes I can't take mine from. Will you love me more if I remain silent? Even the belief in metamorphosis after awhile doesn't bother me.
There was no diminishing that day. The sun in clarity of dew arose Toward splendors unimagined before noon. The day kept on becoming what it was, The hour in being what it had become. Then nothing dwindled. Where the tide fell back The dazzled empire of the field enlarged And we from the cliffside to the farthest brim Heard gulls on offshore islands calling, calling Against the lessening of the light And the cessation of the fields of flowers And the tide crawling toward the darker hours And the black fir branchtips blotting out the sky. A waning of one stillness and a coming Of nothing near the soughing of the trees, Changeless, rimmed by the sea's cold sway.
This is an ancient scene: we stand and stare As hills are excavated and then lifted; Swung on the cable's perpendicular, The load is pivotal to earth and air, A feather-balance, and so delicate The stone floats up as if it had no weight. Below a solitary figure stands To gentle the long bundle from its bed; Athens and Troy are leaning from his hands; The Roman arch, then perilous Chartes ascends Out of the empty spacious world where he Nudges rich burdens toward history. Who, with his own machineries of skill, Has not dreamed often of this very place? Painter and poet lift the buried hill To build a pyramid or clean bright wall, And the great spires that sleep in this quarry Are excavated toward the clouds they marry. What soars is always buried deep for ages, Gently explored in the hill's dark mind, Prized, hewn in slow thoughtful stages, Then floated on these airy equipages, Watched by a figure standing there alone Whose work, humble and hard, is lifting stone.
The moon closes down on us.she rises she enters her mansions &amp; undoes our clothes (Ishtar at the gates relinquishing form). The only need is ritual(men had no original need of food : Adam sinned not by apple but by eating anything but light) the only need is ritual.discover the metabolism of light. Air He gave to us&amp;Fire.Water bore us down.Earth hid us / hides us in itself, our meat is fury &amp; we stay. What was in us was a mask grew teeth inside it to grab &amp; to die in pain, teeth to say our names with, our names the seedbed whence this other flower. But I know a hill where a tower stands green over a whole city a woman lives there.takes what she needs.takes the whole sun in her mouth each night &amp; dawn spreads from her thighs
The morsels, tied to string, are lowered again into the marinade. Today it's beef; it's gone on every day for nine years now. He says he's trying to evolve a system  set down on tiny charts to show how long digestion takes in lots of different cases: with different temperatures, time limits, in the stomach and outside in jars. He says  straight out it is my solemn, human duty to let him bow like some old mandarin over my belly wound so many times a day. Although the wound was not the end for me the hole closed like a valve is permanent: The accidental bullet from the musket sealed my future: adulation, he says, or at least some fame in scientific journals! I'd like to sit at a table without his jar waiting to collect the seeping gastric juices. I've run away. Renewed my family ties and took myself a squaw with waist-length hair. I was her hero: she loved to serve and feed me and even bathe me in the summer streams. It was a place where charts and words were absent but he was clever in four months tracked me down. He called me worthless, nekkid, drunk; invoked my duty and took his spoon to the sludge again. He says I should be very proud of being a partner in the holy race for knowledge. But I yearn for an ordinary life where the textures of my insides aren't on view.
(&ldquo;fire stop thief help murder save the world&rdquo; what world? is it themselves these insects mean? when microscopic shriekings shall have snarled threads of celestial silence huger than eternity,men will be saviours  flop grasshopper,exactly nothing's soon; scream,all ye screamers,till your if is up and vanish under prodigies of un) &ldquo;have you&rdquo; the mountain,while his maples wept air to blood,asked &ldquo;something a little child who's just as small as me can do or be?&rdquo; god whispered him a snowflake &ldquo;yes:you may sleep now,my mountain&rdquo; and this mountain slept while his pines lifted their green lives and smiled
Together, keeping in line, slow as if hypnotised Across the blackboard sea in sombre echelon The food-ships draw their wakes. No Euclid could have devised Neater means to a more essential end  Unless the chalk breaks off, the convoy is surprised. The cranks go up and down, the smoke-trails tendril out, The precious cargoes creak, the signals clack, All is under control and nobody need shout, We are steady as we go, and on our flanks The little whippet warships romp and scurry about. This is a bit like us: the individual sets A course for all his soul's more basic needs Of love and pride-of-life, but sometimes he forgets How much their voyage home depends upon pragmatic And ruthless attitudes destroyers and corvettes.
The gas was on in the Institute,   The flare was up in the gym, A man was running a mineral line,  A lass was singing a hymn, When Captain Webb the Dawley man,  Captain Webb from Dawley, Came swimming along the old canal  That carried the bricks to Lawley.   Swimming along    Swimming along    Swimming along from Severn, And paying a call at Dawley Bank while swimming along to Heaven. The sun shone low on the railway line  And over the bricks and stacks, And in at the upstairs windows  Of the Dawley houses' backs, When we saw the ghost of Captain Webb,  Webb in a water sheeting, Come dripping along in a bathing dress  To the Saturday evening meeting.   Dripping along    Dripping along    To the Congregational Hall; Dripping and still he rose over the sill and faded away in a wall. There wasn't a man in Oakengates  That hadn't got hold of the tale, And over the valley in Ironbridge,  And round by Coalbrookdale, How Captain Webb the Dawley man,  Captain Webb from Dawley, Rose rigid and dead from the old canal  That carries the bricks to Lawley.   Rigid and dead    Rigid and dead    To the Saturday congregation, Paying a call at Dawley Bank on his way to his destination.
To weed the Garden of the Mind Of all rank growths of doubt and sin, And let faith's flowers thrive and win To blossom; and, through faith, to find That lilies, too, can toil and spin, And roses work for good and right; That even the frailest flower that fills A serious purpose, as God wills, Is all man needs to give him light, Is all he needs for all his ills. Here is a Garden gone to flowers While one beside it runs to weeds  Yet both were sown with similar seeds: What was it? Did the World, or Hours, Bring forth according to  Or was it that the Gardener Neglected one? or did not care What growths matured to slay and snare? Thinking, whatever might occur, Labour, perhaps, would manage there. But Labour looked and took his ease, Saying, &ldquo;To-morrow I will do; Will weed my Garden.&rdquo; And in view Of all that work sat down at peace, Waiting for something to ensue. Whose fault? The Gardener's? Haply no, <> And yet, whence came the weeds that spoil?  From Heaven! brought by winds that blow.  God give us all the gift to toil!
My slim anthology of Third World War Poets slipped from the shelf at ten past six, and the 6.09 Pullman train was exactly a minute late. I ran to my window; across the fields a stiff breeze ruffled a herd of cows. Two lovers glanced upwards from a gate. The sky was the colour of the sky, but there was a stench. &ldquo;Take care, but remember to bring it back intact!&rdquo; I shouted. They laughed, and I froze in a useless position like the dog on the cover of the jumble sale Girls Own Annual.
Sitting Bull's ghost-laughter shakes The hand of the marksman on the grass Who hears the tick-tocking firearms tell Another time has come to pass As Ivan's rifle zeroes in And carries off the loving cup  Hard times when the Pioneer Is being out-shot by the Bear. And Davy Crockett's dead and gone Whose knife-flash lit the Alamo, And Daniel Boone and his coonskin cap Have entered the continent. Texas Joe, Wild Bill, and homiletic Deer- Slayer whose rifle never missed  All sure shots are underground. A greater marksman cut them down. Another time must come to pass, And soon the hero's heel must itch For the poisoned arrow already nocked By lover, mother, time's queenly bitch Who slays all heroes in their time. And now with impossible middle names The roughneck of the future comes As if all heroes' times weren't done. The blindness of the hero's pride Has driven him eyeless from the stage, Turned all his glory into myth, His power into senseless rage. Thersites, practical man, destroys The City with a formula, While Achilles' famous sword Could only turn Scamander red.
Some Language Poets gathered on the levee to watch the sunset, with a quiet bevvy. The usual low slaughter was red heavy. Quite white water purple, what a trace bandage buildings, mirror, the slapped face hard shine, hand over the carapace. A mill swim sounder, that if any, bounding. An arm case dark, lung, infill, ironfounding. An all there was, reflex, prey to surrounding. Half diving strips. And even open wide, opened, red cavalry sea well astride a swell, shouts, footbrake this, that side. Sink of ink where else but up, oh deadly. Amber ember, win a lyric, redly into walking over, stick a medley  as if a Mississippi knew blue, note, ingot, puddle, plumb down, the whole float gagging, thrapple, craig, hass, last boat. Bivouac pegging. Language licked a fight. They were over the taken. Blood filthy bright. Find a pressure point, run out of sight.
Knowledge my nakedness, Where is the accurate, the innocent skillful man, The accurate shining, behind whose forehead lie what young dreams? I am the present, and I know your face. Mercy must enter grace, Wisdom this wilderness. These are thick forest fears whose hidden rivers Are the past under leaves feeding each taproot of our lives. The present touches again, again, again, continual music. The touching by majestic images of common day. Have you looked at the Bible since you changed your mind? Certain Mozart applies, recurrences of Beethoven; All are true. And now only the new is accurate.
<> The edges of their venerable pain, Hold yet, through solvent years and rub of rain, The long-dead eye unshut, the splintering shield, The flick of the sword through flesh. Yet uncongealed, Yet tipped with the toxic glitter, these remain: The knife in the loins twisted and plunged again, The blood unrusted and the bane unhealed. And let not any legend-haunted man Seek solace for the pity and the fear In holier writings lest he find redress Too fearful, where the feet of Judas ran The dark road to the cliff-top, lest he hear Pale Hagar crying in the wilderness.
I am schooled in the varieties of madness. Feared beyond nickname, the Reverend dispensed Lines for transcribing in copybook script, Unflinching authority, Latin and caning, As if his future depended upon it. Borrowed on odd days, like the pitches, With crinkle-cut hair and sandpapered face, The games-master cultivated his own pleasures. &lsquo;Posture!&rsquo; he'd yell: frozen already, we'd freeze. On the way back to school, he'd de-bag stragglers. After two years, we trekked upstairs to &lsquo;Shell&rsquo;: A whiskery, tweedy, leathery sort of place With squeaky hinged seats, a tuckshop cupboard, An air of dim complicity. From Mr Salmon, I learned only to evade his hand-picked attention. There are photos to prove it. In one I'm slouched Like a doll who's yet to have stuffing knocked in; But later I'm standing now, behind the Reverend  There's that horrible confident smirk of survival: I'd known most of the worst of the world by ten. Old fools, the lot of them, not even doing A quarter of their best, not caring or seeing How much there was to give or how to give it; Teaching instead bad habits by default  Slow lessons in obsession, terror, guilt.
Having been a farmer's daughter she didn't want to be a farmer's wife, didn't want the smell of ripe manure in all his clothes, the corresponding flies in her kitchen, a pail of slop below the sink, a crate of baby chicks beside the stove, piping beneath their bare lightbulb, cows calling at the gate for him to come, cows standing in the chute as he crops their horns with his long sharp shears. So she nagged him toward a job in town; so she sprang from the table, weeping, when he swore; so, after supper, she sulks over her mending as he unfolds his pearl pocketknife to trim a callus on his palm. Too much like her mother, he says, not knowing any other reason why she spoils the children, or why he comes in from the combine with his wrenches to find potatoes boiled dry in their pot, his wife in the parlor on the bench at her oak piano not playing you understand, just sitting like a fern in that formal room. So much time to think, these long hours: like her mother, each night she goes to bed when her husband's tired, gets up when he gets up, and in between tries not to move, listening to the sleep of this good man who lies beside and over her. So much time alone, since everything he knows is practical. Just this morning, he plunged an icepick into the bloated side of the cow unable to rise, dying where it fell, its several stomachs having failed  too full, he said, of sweet wet clover.
Were I an artist, Lydia, I  Would paint you as you merit, Not as my eyes, but dreams descry;  Not in the flesh, but spirit. The canvas I would paint you on  Should be a strip of heaven; My brush, a sunbeam; pigments, dawn  And night and starry even. Your form and features to express  Likewise your soul's chaste whiteness, I'd take the primal essences  Of darkness and of brightness. I'd take pure night to paint your hair;  Stars for your eye; and morning To paint your skin the rosy air  Which is your limbs' adorning. To paint the love-bows of your lips,  I'd mix, for colors, kisses; And for your breasts and finger-tips,  Sweet odors and soft blisses. And to complete the picture well,  I'd temper all with woman,  Some tears, some laughter; heaven and hell,  To show you yet are human.
I work all day, Said Simple John, Myself a house to buy. I work all day, Said Simple John, But Pierrot wondered why. For Pierrot loved the long white road, And Pierrot loved the moon, And Pierrot loved a star-filled sky, And the breath of a rose in June. I have one wife, Said Simple John, And, faith, I love her yet. I have one wife, Said Simple John, But Pierrot left Pierrette. For Pierrot saw a world of girls, And Pierrot loved each one, And Pierrot thought all maidens fair As flowers in the sun. Oh, I am good, Said Simple John, The Lord will take me in. Yes, I am good, Said Simple John, But Pierrot's steeped in sin. For Pierrot played on a slim guitar, And Pierrot loved the moon, And Pierrot ran down the long white road With the burgher's wife one June.
Mazdaism has overcome the world the war of darkness and light has obscured the truth. Sexuality is loose by itself, and the most striking victims, women, are organizing themselves to further the light. While scratching what is hidden, the men stay home in gloom, deteriorate further toward matter while their wives and the mothers of their children think they're warriors and Virgins of the Bulb
To enter that rhythm where the self is lost, here breathing:heartbeat:and the subtle music of their relation make our dance, and hasten us to the moment when all things become magic, another possibility. That blind moment, midnight, when all sight begins, and the dance itself is all our breath, and we ourselves the moment of life and death. Blinded;but given now another saving, the self as vision, at all times perceiving, all arts all senses being languages, delivered of will, being transformed in truth  for life's sake surrendering moment and images, writing the poem;in love making;bringing to birth.
&lsquo;If I were a king and did not know it,  I should be no king; But if I was fully convinced that I was a king, And if all men deemed me so, and further If I knew that all men deemed me such,  I should be a king, And all the riches of the king should be mine.&rsquo; In other words, if a king loses confidence, Logically he must cease to exist. Much the same is true of gods. Kings and gods are nowadays much missed. Tauler, whose words I was quoting, Himself remarks on good authority: &lsquo;The eye by which I see God Is the same eye by which God sees me.&rsquo;
Going to bed And when we have done Lying quietly together in the dark Warm houses stand within us Sleepy angels smile in doorways Little jewelled horses jolt by without sound Everyone is rich and no one has money I can love you Thank God I can love you All that can happen to us is not known to the guns Are you awake darling? Do not fall asleep yet To sleep now would seem a way to die so easily And death is something which poems must be about But the way our bodies were wings Flying in and out of each other ...
<> I like tales of shivering.  Once a scarecrow on a hill Tossed his ragged arms at me  That was when I went to see Folks that live at Fisherville. And my father said, &ldquo;You know, When it's dark that old scarecrow Gets down, rags and sticks and all, And, like some old tramp, he goes, Straw-wisps sticking from his toes, Down the road, right past this wall. &ldquo;Wobble-legged and loose of arm, Slow he shambles by the farm: And if children are not good, Snug in bed at eight o'clock, On the window he will knock With long knuckled hands of wood. &ldquo;Then his empty face pressed flat To the pane, his tattered hat Flopping in the wind, he'll shake His gaunt finger at them; and Threaten them with head and hand, And with teeth, too, like a rake. &ldquo;Then into the night he'll pack, There to meet with bogie Jack, Jack-o'-Lantern; and the two, Arm in arm, will wander on, Scaring folks until it's dawn, As all goblin people do. &ldquo;You may see them through the pane Passing in the night and rain: When you hear the watch-dogs bark, Then along the weedy side Of some garden dim they glide, Where they  Sometime, when I can, for fun I am going to take my gun; Creep up on that hill and blow That old scarecrow into bits  Then he  Any children more, I know.
I can still hear it: it was Saturday, and the fifes of the locomotives announced to us citizens of hope in the city of hope that we could set out for freedom from every station of the uprising. The atmosphere, gravid for months, eager to drop its litter, disgorged artillery and demented machine-guns which perforated bodies to ease them of their souls in the post office of death. It was over quickly, and Prague, with its ripped paving, and sand, and puddles, and toppled trees, looked as if a new city were being founded, a borough of the abyss. Heroes I do not sing ... their manly courage shields their silence, our mute shame. Yet children, there were children who for years when the sirens wailed threw their treasures into an &ldquo;air-raid bag&rdquo;  the same ones the butcher last May drove before his tanks. Those, and the unflayed, the uncrushed, those crying from house to house after their families and somehow finding them, still shriek in their sleep, &ldquo;Mama, where did they take my leg?&rdquo; And I saw a man plugging at the German planes with a pistol ... And I saw two vans pass each other at Smichov, one carting the corpses out of Zbraslav, the other hauling in calves and painted A GIFT TO PRAGUE. Madness. But life was like that. And then I know a painter: knife in hand he stood guard over the poorhouse. On the ninth, at daybreak, he heard pounding on the door. Opening, he saw a dusty figure stretch his beefy arms wide and simply blurt out, laughing,  And who could forget the old codger whose bliss it was to trot in front of the huge Russian tanks clearing away each stone, even the smallest.
If a flower could walk independent of a lover's hand or an army of bouquets invade the red land, straggling up the foothills to the border or if the animals we see so deeply rooted in the moment we see them were in fact grown there only there to be on hand when we open our eyes a horse a sheep a dog full of perhaps or if the stone we sit on the first day of thaw had called us to itself and we were just the pronouns in its long sentence, and we hear it and gloss it as the pasture, morality, the dialectic, or if the picture in a book were a quick eye examining us before it winks its pages and goes on or if the phone that never stops ringing were an ear itself just checking our silence like mother pausing at night by the nursery door or if the piece of bread I eat were a brave explorer leaving the familiar airy light for a research expedition into the ordinary dark they hear about with dread, yet dare to enter and go and go and never come to the end
From the candles and dumb shadows,  And the house where love had died, I stole to the vast moonlight  And the whispering life outside. But I found no lips of comfort,  No home in the moon's light (I, little and lone and frightened  In the unfriendly night), And no meaning in the voices....  Far over the lands, and through The dark, beyond the ocean,  I willed to think of  For I knew, had you been with me  I'd have known the words of night, Found peace of heart, gone gladly  In comfort of that light. Oh! the wind with soft beguiling  Would have stolen my thought away; And the night, subtly smiling,  Came by the silver way; And the moon came down and danced to me,  And her robe was white and flying; And trees bent their heads to me  Mysteriously crying; And dead voices wept around me;  And dead soft fingers thrilled; And the little gods whispered     But ever  Desperately I willed; Till all grew soft and far  And silent ... And suddenly I found you white and radiant,  Sleeping quietly, Far out through the tides of darkness.  And I there in that great light Was alone no more, nor fearful;  For there, in the homely night, Was no thought else that mattered,  And nothing else was true, But the white fire of moonlight,  And a white dream of you.
Among the more irritating minor ideas Of Mr. Homburg during his visits home To Concord, at the edge of things, was this: To think away the grass, the trees, the clouds, Not to transform them into other things, Is only what the sun does every day, Until we say to ourselves that there may be A pensive nature, a mechanical And slightly detestable  From man's ghost, larger and yet a little like, Without his literature and without his gods ... No doubt we live beyond ourselves in air, In an element that does not do for us, So well, that which we do for ourselves, too big, A thing not planned for imagery or belief, Not one of the masculine myths we used to make, A transparency through which the swallow weaves, Without any form or any sense of form, What we know in what we see, what we feel in what We hear, what we are, beyond mystic disputation, In the tumult of integrations out of the sky, And what we think, a breathing like the wind, A moving part of a motion, a discovery Part of a discovery, a change part of a change, A sharing of color and being part of it. The afternoon is visibly a source, Too wide, too irised, to be more than calm, Too much like thinking to be less than thought, Obscurest parent, obscurest patriarch, A daily majesty of meditation, That comes and goes in silences of its own. We think, then, as the sun shines or does not. We think as wind skitters on a pond in a field Or we put mantles on our words because The same wind, rising and rising, makes a sound Like the last muting of winter as it ends. A new scholar replacing an older one reflects A moment on this fantasia. He seeks For a human that can be accounted for. The spirit comes from the body of the world, Or so Mr. Homburg thought: the body of a world Whose blunt laws make an affectation of mind, The mannerism of nature caught in a glass And there become a spirit's mannerism, A glass aswarm with things going as far as they can.
It was the bumping the someone-breaking-into-the-house sound she knew she would hear. She shot up in bed turned on the light and waited. All her plans seemed put to the test But she would not venture into a dark, night void downstairs alone. With the new hallway light shining down the stairs She'd see him before he saw her. Time to dial 911 and holler for help She could open the window she could scream out she could jump out Because if he came up the stairs He was not coming for the stereo He was not coming for the T.V. He was not coming for the blender ... The crazy man next door had late night radio up loud. It was a plot, she thought, to drown out her screams It was a plot because he was crazy. Outside on the narrow street dogs bayed and she waited waited eyes drooping until dawn flashed her hem until the sun's gentle pat of safety patted her to sleep.
Did it turn out a goose? Did some loose liver, Teetering homewards, run into a sheet? Or was it some conurban Bernadette, who met That white display of where the road would never stray, That dizzy image, never quite forgotten by the busy village? Or did some fierce and backward god, mad For a female hand, land with lashing feathers and, Finding Lemnos but no Leda, leave a Noun generic to a dismal field, a file of houses, and a derrick? Or, once upon a time, were swans upon a lake  Like snowflakes on a silver ladle  Able to evade the falling smuts, the avid poacher? And is the &lsquo;Hen and Chickens&rsquo; heir To the singing last sung there? Or is the bus conductor's cry No real contention, just a clerical convention?
Before the wind, with rain-drowned stocks, The pleated, crimson hollyhocks  Are bending; And, smouldering in the breaking brown, Above the hills that rim the town,  The day is ending. The air is heavy with the damp; And, one by one, each cottage lamp  Is lighted; Infrequent passers of the street Stroll on or stop to talk or greet,  Benighted. I look beyond my city yard, And watch the white moon struggling hard,  Cloud-buried; The wind is driving toward the east, A wreck of pearl, all cracked and creased  And serried. At times the moon, erupting, streaks Some long cloud, raised in mountain peaks  Of shadow,  That, seamed with silver, vein on vein, Grows to a far volcano chain  Of Eldorado. The wind, that blows from out the hills, Is like a woman's touch that stills  A sorrow: The moon sits high with many a star In the deep calm: and fair and far  Abides to-morrow.
All the long days of years lying alone the word feels pelt of rain, shivers of night chill, and coils in the box you built. It whimpers. At first light it stands, stretches to leash-length, digs a small hole, having learned to wait, become what through all seasons and all faces you can't say. Eye-brimming, recalling the down-spiral of leaves, flushed wingbeats and sun's joy, you lie flat in the white yards of the clinic, among victims low in tunnels of shade. The word scratches, paces, softly drags its chain over the emptied bowl, barks. You can't call it now. It won't hunt for you. Penned, you wait and listen to machines digging steadily as nails in dirt, a hole regrettable, too deep, unfillable.
The hay has just been stacked in neat yellow bricks like some complex puzzle that needs to be solved. The sheds full, it sits alone out there in the stark yellow paddock pathetic edifice waiting to be torched or blown away. But it's got Escher written all over it so there's a sense of the infinite. Though early summer storms can be pretty savage around here. Lightning-struck trees along the roadsides are testament to this. Dad reckons we'd better get straight to it. Covering the stack with blue plastic sheeting and staking it deep in the ground. School's just finished and next year it'll be university in the city. Art history. None of this landscape stuff give me Jeff Koons fucking Cicciolina, those fleshy cybernauts without a field or ear of wheat in sight. So it's hard to get motivated and Dad tells me I'm not too big for a clip under the ear. I wonder if he's joking but get out there with my brothers and get stuck into it. I tell them about  <> thinking about Cicciolina. And how stylish it would be to have a film version with Koons instead of Alan Bates. But keeping Julie Christie as Bathsheba Everdene. Gross! The blue plastic flaps viciously as the wind lifts. It cracks in our faces. It catches my youngest brother and slices his cheek. The blood spray-paints the hay. He keeps at it, swearing at the top of his voice. Lightning highlights the installation and for a dreadful moment we seem to be furiously adrift in the vast ocean of the paddock. Over the hills where the storm's dark eye dilates. The rain drives hard and I forget about everything. Finally the hay is wrapped. Christo appears in my head and I keep him there.
Smuggled human hair from Mexico Falls radiant around the waxy O Of her scream. Shades on, leather coat and pants, Yoko On her knees like the famous Kent State photo Where the girl can't shriek her boyfriend alive, her arms Windmilling Ohio sky. A pump in John's chest heaves To mimic death throes. The blood is made of latex. His glasses: broken on the plastic sidewalk. A scowling David Chapman, his arms outstretched, His pistol barrel spiraling fake smoke In a siren's red wash, completes the composition, And somewhere background music plays &ldquo;Imagine&rdquo; Before the tableau darkens. We push a button To renew the scream. The chest starts up again.
I have thought much about snow, the mute pilgrimage of all those flakes and about the dark wanderings of leaves. I have stalked all four seasons and seen how they beat the same path through the same woods again and again. I used to take a multitude of trains, trusting the strategy of tracks, of distance. I sailed on ships trusting the arbitrary north. Now I stand still at my window watching the snow which knows only one direction, falling in silence towards silence.
i am, horse unhorse, me i am, horse unhorse, me i am, horse unhorse, me i am, horse unhorse, me i am, horse unhorse, me i am, horse unhorse, me i am, horse unhorse, me i am horse: unhorse me!
Stubborn hidalgo, rusting in his mail, Outliving enemies, his loves, his time. What spell, what doom lures him to hope that Time, Whose breath seres every limb, would leave him hale? The stagnant swamps he's swigged! How many's the time Since being gulled by a Medicine Man's tall tale He's almost found that fount; but weary, frail, An old dog can but piddle away his time. Who hasn't hacked through mangroves, tried to suck The juvenescent dew from the earth's breast, Gulped potions, bottles, jugs, with just his luck While Memory's daughter still holds out her Grail  <> She sings, from thickets serried as chain-mail.
On the wide heath at evening overtaken, When the fast-reddening sun Drops, and against the sky the looming bracken Waves, and the day is done, Though no unfriendly nostril snuffs his bone, Though English wolves be dead, The fox abroad on errands of his own, The adder gone to bed, The weary traveler from his aching hip Lengthens his long stride; Though Home be but a humming on his lip, No happiness, no pride, He does not drop him under the yellow whin To sleep the darkness through; Home to the yellow light that shines within The kitchen of a loud shrew, Home over stones and sand, through stagnant water He goes, mile after mile Home to a wordless poaching son and a daughter With a disdainful smile, Home to the worn reproach, the disagreeing, The shelter, the stale air; content to be Pecked at, confined, encroached upon, it being Too lonely, to be free.
Why should this Negro insolently stride Down the red noonday on such noiseless feet? Piled in his barrow, tawnier than wheat, Lie heaps of smoldering daisies, somber-eyed, Their copper petals shriveled up with pride, Hot with a superfluity of heat, Like a great brazier borne along the street By captive leopards, black and burning pied. Are there no water-lilies, smooth as cream, With long stems dripping crystal? Are there none Like those white lilies, luminous and cool, Plucked from some hemlock-darkened northern stream By fair-haired swimmers, diving where the sun Scarce warms the surface of the deepest pool?
Tenochtitlan! grey seven thousand feet high mist of dust tin door open to slow motion immobilized traffic  girl at window terrace  terrace a heartmobile  wind! dust of wind wind! sail of dead ghost opium people fantast the fields of Egluria these watches promote me venetian blinds, Chicagos of Zeno The mountain erupts land masses grab the Pacific earthquakes the sky is peeling its skin off! Is this American mood? 1960 weather beasts, who tampers the moon tides? Reprieve. Sail of dust wind venetian mountain sequence zeroguns silence the street mute traffics desperate surrealism backfire from motorcycles waves over empty rooftops Geneva of movies, who ate the dogbrick sandwich? I've cut a loaf of it and splattered eiou chaos slamming venetian blinds click, the cat asleep aloha, tidal waves Where am I? you answer the question where am I? who's here? who wants Veracruz? what is New York? who is San Francisco? Friend where are you? what to dogo wherehow? Motorcycles of atonal venetian blind dust of wind rooftop!
Delivers from distances of wood, dumptruck squawling, a nation of red dirt wedged in its seams, the hoist's screech a child abandoned to big shirts flapping on a line. Good mix, the black countryman says, stooped by age. God's plenty of heat in the heavy log. Feel it, meaning my wife, her kind always tells, city or country, don't matter. Stacking steadily, shirt off, skin like dirt glistening a rooster awake, his chatter's of need, of hurry, of lateborn mouths that wait, shadows he makes me see playing clay smooth, red dust, warning some's light, can't be chopped apart. It'll close on any wedge like family. This quick burner, hearth-host.
Newsboy knocks, I buy the DEFENDER. These colored papers Is a solid sender. I read all about The murdering news, And who killed who With the love sick blues. Then I read The lynchings and such, Come to the conclusion White folks ain't much. Then I turn over And read the scandal In the gossip column, Initials for a handle. Then the pictures: Marva looks well  But if Joe was my husband, I'd also look swell. It's just a matter Of Who is Who  If I was Marva I'd be In the papers, too. Wouldn't you?
During the First World War, I was back in law school for a course or two, waiting to be admitted to the corps training there. The study of law in that time of violence was a luxury, and I never tasted the pleasure of it as much. But I did not have to drill, or sleep on one of the cots I had seen in the basement of a school building (better than the trenches at that!): before I was admitted to the corps, there was talk of an armistice and soon enough news of it. As we sat in class, just a handful, we could hear the factory whistles and the whistles of the boats on the river. And then, class over, we stopped on the broad stairs that led from the school building to listen to the motor trucks racing uptown, blowing their horns for all they were worth. It was twilight by then, and the moon was shining in the clear autumn sky. In spite of all the noise on the avenue, a block away, the sound came to those of us on the stairs much diminished almost the buzz of insects. A great sabbath had begun. The man who taught us international law stood on the steps, too, still talking to us, and he spoke cautiously of the nationalism excited by the President and the Allies against Austria, sorry that the policy would undo the work of many centuries to have men forget in a wide empire of law  based on justice and equity  the accidental differences of their birth. But his voice was just another small voice among all those many voices which were sounding happily, raucously, as the lights of the city began to shine.
Despite strangulated cries Of dune-lovers and the bourgeoisie In coastal resorts, thirsty Turbines, trucks, tractors, cars, Furnaces, hair-groom sets and Electric toothbrushes demand Minarets on stilts offshore, Steel straws shoved down Through chocolate mud. The juice Pulses faster than the earth's Hind tit will serve us, oozing Through faults in beds of shale To blacktop surface waves Where downed gulls Make no departures. By unseasonable gale Pitched shoreward, oil Casts trouble on troubled waters. A slithering sauce fouls Nests the waves pound. Fish float belly-up, The earth is bleeding. An ocean of salt Rubs in our wounds.
And this from the second or third millenium B.C., a female, aged about twenty-two. A white, fine skull, full up with darkness As a shell with sea, drowned in the centuries. Small, perfect. The cranium would fit the palm Of a man's hand. Some plague or violence Destroyed her, and her whiteness lay safe in a shroud Of silence, undisturbed, unrained on, dark For four thousand years. Till a tractor in summer Biting its way through the longcairn for supplies Of stone, broke open the grave and let a crowd of light Stare in at her, and she stared quietly back. As I look at her I feel none of the shock The farmer felt as, unprepared, he found her. Here in the Museum, like death in hospital, Reasons are given, labels, causes, catalogues. The smell of death is done. Left, only her bone Purity, the light and shade beauty that her man Was denied sight of, the perfect edge of the place Where the pieces join, with no mistakes, like boundaries. She's a tree in winter, stripped white on a black sky, Leafless formality, brow, bough in fine relief. I, at some other season, illustrate the tree Fleshed, with woman's hair and colours and the rustling Blood, the troubled mind that she has overthrown. We stare at each other, dark into sightless Dark, seeing only ourselves in the black pools, Gulping the risen sea that booms in the shell.
A furred drizzle hiding the sea, the hill tedious with stone walls, so she lagged behind Mummy and the pram filled with grizzling baby. Nothing delicious except the dandelions in the grit outside the Merrylees', each perfect as an unbroken yolk. Fingers could never reach the bottom of all that yellow ... &lsquo;Not a nice flower!&rsquo; She trudged beneath her mother's arms, strapped to disappointment, stretched to be a mother too. The pram threatened to roll her down the twists to the shore racked with weed but she bumped it a few steps, then elbows breaking, gave in; was a nothing again. The sun was out the afternoon she and Eleanor pulled all the yellow heads. Hands stickied, they were touching the closing faces when Mr Merrylees loomed, severe as a steeple. She fled home, knowing nothing in the world could prise the petals open again. Light came in the night, took her down her garden. A feather seed, she floated over the hedge, by leek and cabbage rows to a stairway into the gound where darkness was velvety as a party dress. In seconds she slid out by the sea, saw its wildness was combed, its grey crayoned blue. On the water jewels grew and the cups painted with silkclad ladies she'd seen once in a strange window. And scattered over sea and beach were flecks bright as dandelions.
In some forlorn magazine in side his eyes. Diagonal paths in pain. This mauve architect wandering behind nightshades structures lineages. I prayed for. A poet of seams and mortar. Crying in side rafters I cling to between centuries. A griot of travels inside self. Admits to forty-four years of rites. Horns testifying. Legacy of Bird. Magic into selves. Magic. Short bursts of sorrow for the joy, sermons emit over silenced glasses. Von. A Free man quilts longings into blankets. Roads for an other day. Here I am. Here I am. Here I am. Lexicons of his fingers shout before a congregation of head nods. Too much. Too much and too much to read
Many by night she worried Over, or rejoiced when they did, Felt the woe, joined in the feast  Those her heart's ocean cherished. To her porch all in trouble And the feeble knew her hall. Angharad's gown of scarlet, Woven of deeds, reached her feet. She bore the care of sufferers And with shared strength, cast out fears. On her knees in the grey dawn Gave her day to the Kingdom, Today's simplicity bringing As wine to the wounded King. By praising God, over again To create a world unfallen. Sister of sun, of the breezes, Of the day where the wave plays, Sister to the anxious stars In the zeal of their musters. Broke down anger and envy, Healed with the fruits of her tree, Broadened the wide gift freely. Old anguish opened her heart  A yearning that bore witness To its deep root in the soil. She gave to God twofold care, Both woe and joy together. To us gave, like the sky of God, Her anxiety's priesthood.
The sleepy sound of a tea-time tide Slaps at the rocks the sun has dried, Too lazy, almost, to sink and lift Round low peninsulas pink with thrift. The water, enlarging shells and sand, Grows greener emerald out from land And brown over shadowy shelves below The waving forests of seaweed show. Here at my feet in the short cliff grass Are shells, dried bladderwrack, broken glass, Pale blue squills and yellow rock roses. The next low ridge that we climb discloses One more field for the sheep to graze While, scarcely seen on this hottest of days, Far to the eastward, over there, Snowdon rises in pearl-grey air. Multiple lark-song, whispering bents, The thymy, turfy and salty scents And filling in, brimming in, sparkling and free The sweet susurration of incoming sea.
The beautiful American word, Sure, As I have come into a room, and touch The lamp's button, and the light blooms with such Certainty where the darkness loomed before, As I care for what I do not know, and care Knowing for little she might not have been, And for how little she would be unseen, The intercourse of lives miraculous and dear. Where the light is, and each thing clear, Separate from all others, standing in its place, I drink the time and touch whatever's near, And hope for day when the whole world has that face: For what assures her present every year? In dark accidents the mind's sufficient grace.
Close held by warm darkness, wet murmuring darkness, the crystal ball. The mellow stage light transfuses into the skull and the brain welters in light. The body forgotten, one with the dark, one's being nothing  but it projects a fa&ccedil;ade a tall window which sucks in the light. And the light breaks in hard splinters between one's being which is nothing and the very bright window which is nothing. It is all very peaceful and probably like heaven. Though far off and thinly terror runs down a thin wire  Wells into sound  Fills the horizon to crush us with a noise like tearing silk.
Notices darker form move against dark treey background. It's not on all fours therefore has language. He prepares to speak to it of love or knife or wine. It is one of his kind he fears and desires. A joker in the endless pack, a shape. Notices form is further. Call back or hope go? What words are in the mind of the dark going one? To know that word would be sweet. Moves towards it to intercept soft as if by chance. No change of speed. No word to need. The lines are not going to meet. Loses sight of figure in the woods. Waits. Makes up conversation. Answer to no possible question. Asks it. Stands. Geometry is unreliable. Lover.
<> Speaking to a companion Say these words: &ldquo;A woman what hustles Never keeps nothin' For all her hustlin'. Somebody always gets What she goes on the street for. If it ain't a pimp It's a bull what gets it. I been hustlin' now Till I ain't much good any more. I got nothin' to show for it. Some man got it all, Every night's hustlin' I ever did.&rdquo;
Stretched across counties, countries, the train Rushes faster than memory through the rain. The rise of each hill is a musical phrase. Listen to the rhythm of space, how it lies, How it rolls, how it reaches, what unwinding relays Of wood and meadow where the red cows graze Come back again and again to closed eyes  That garden, that pink farm, that village steeple, And here and there the solitary people Who stand arrested when express trains pass, That stillness of an orchard in deep grass. Yet landscapes flow like this toward a place, A point in time and memory's own face. So when the clamor stops, we really climb Down to the earth, closing the curve of time, Meeting those we have left, to those we meet Bringing our whole life that has moved so fast, And now is gathered up and here at last, To unroll like a ribbon at their feet.
 snugly named with a rowing boat chained like a sleeping dog to steps cut into clay. There's even a wooden wharf, once built for ferry trips but now decayed. It's a bottom-of-the-garden bay by-passed by surfies and marina buffs where residents from  slowly descend from Hope Street with both hands on the rail. (How gently they undress in the shade!) There's a resident heron, some small jade waves, and a single thin tin shed on stilts that seems to be stumbling out to sea.
the( Wistfully dead seem generous)don't All suspect each(nor have i observed some chucking some legally into Oblivion wave little flags weeping flatter thoroughly imploring threaten)the wistFully dead you directly perceive or minus news alimony blackmail whathavewe and propaganda(it is incredible But others don't scream murmur wink at kid an&aelig;sthetize marry bump off or otherwise amplify others) the so to speak witsfulLy dead are not relatively speaking uncultured(who Very distinctly confine their omnipotent literally their putting it more than mildly Absolute destructivity to non- entities e. g. the) whis-per it ( Living
Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he harrow the valleys after thee? Wilt thou trust him because his strength is great? or wilt thou leave thy labour to him? Wilt thou believe him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather it into thy barn? Commonly it dangles down like a turkey-cock's comb, but when a unicorn has a mind to fight or put it to any other use, what does he do but make it stand, and then it is as straight as an arrow. <> <> <> <>
Wild gusts of drizzle hoot and hiss  Through writhing lindens torn in two  The dead's own days are days like this!  Yea; let me sit and be with you. Here in your willow chair, whose seat  Spreads purple plush. Hark! how the gusts Seem moaning voices that repeat  Some grief here; in this room, where dusts Make dim each ornament and chair;  This locked-in memory where you died: Since angels stood here, saintly fear  Guards each dark corner, mournful-eyed. Through this dim light bend your dim face;  Or, like a rain-mist, gray of gleam, A soft, dim cloudiness of lace,  Stand near me while I dream, I dream.
It is the sixth year of the war in China. The children of the first winter help with the babies. Not even a clash in the north for some time now. The Long March is legend; Taerchwang's a song; Splinters of autumn drift over this year. How can strangers be told?A soldier stands still, He wavers on his feet; the army has stood for three years, Lacking the strength to advance. The boys who went away to war five years ago Wrote a letter or two, then died; anyway did not write. The soldiers waver, are thin in their torn clothes. But they hold.The cliff-city holds. Not the blazing, not the wild turning, not the lonely stand. There was a silence then; but now the fire has fallen On the exotic silent cities, in a storm on London. Not alone, not unknown here, faces endowed with stillness. &ldquo;The general's white hair, and the soldier's tears.&rdquo;
Asleep, amazed, with lolling head, Arms in supplication spread, Body shudders, dumb with fear; There lifts the Moon, but who am I, Cloaked in shadow wavering by, Stooping, muttering at his ear? Bound is Body, foot and hand, Bound to lie at my command, Horror bolted to lie still While I sap what sense I will. Through the darkness here come I, Softly fold about the prey; Body moaning must obey, Must not question who or why, Must accept me, come what may, Dumbly must obey. When owls and cocks dispute the dawn, Through the window I am drawn Streaming out, a foggy breath. ...Body waking with a sigh From the spell that was half Death, Smiles for freedom, blinks an eye At the sun-commanded sky, &lsquo;O morning scent and tree-top song, Slow-rising smoke and nothing wrong!&rsquo;
I see them before the television, the proud owners of a wooden case in which the four-o-five presents its milky versions of success with the last official faces of a time that was always more dead than alive, when Hanratty cleaned the windows and a crime was solved by men with briefcases and bowlers, when gentlemen made jokes in evening dress. They fought their way to this, to Lady Barnett to Bernard Braden and John Freeman, Kathie Kay and Alan Breeze, to all those names of power that solved nothing but could somehow fill the hours before they slipped away to private lives which grew more private still, past old reliable faces by which they set their clocks precisely to the latest hour. Some blurred depth in their eyes won't come to rest: perhaps they're trapped in what they bought, in all their trappings, in the slim white frame of the square photograph they sent back home to show the television. Now they're caught and solemn. Slowly they become the stillness by which they are both possessed. They're listening intently for a name which once had power, on lips that formed the sound in darkened flats, in beds in which they slept and touched each other. Some act of violence has pitched them here before the screen. The actors know their speeches, are adept at pulling faces, know when to go. They've been elsewhere and are there still, on neutral ground, of which this patch of grey is evidence.
Moment of stillness under stars when the doll calls calendars drop downher eyes drop down (notice them dropping down) focused on a distant boatThrobbing shadow in relief The boundaries set to break apart We watch as it unfolds for us The more we look the more we can't lookFading lines in her imagination An open cut water between her legsScissors &amp; lights The feather merchant's victim (innocent girl astride his thighs innocent thrusts no one can stop) Ikon of Pleasure Kafka's incredible machine journeys to magic islesfelt as nostalgia The captain crammed in the prow of the old barge Dreaming the barge Walking backwards on the pink plank cryptical messenger measurable deflections in the magnetic field
I think the dead are tender. Shall we kiss?  My lady laughs, delighting in what is. If she but sighs, a bird puts out its tongue. She makes space lonely with a lovely song. She lilts a low soft language, and I hear Down long sea-chambers of the inner ear. We sing together; we sing mouth to mouth. The garden is a river flowing south. She cries out loud the soul's own secret joy; She dances, and the ground bears her away. She knows the speech of light, and makes it plain A lively thing can come to life again. I feel her presence in the common day, In that slow dark that widens every eye. She moves as water moves, and comes to me, Stayed by what was, and pulled by what would be.
lately your words are drugged passages with razor edges that draw blood &amp; tears and memories of less difficult moments whenlove that beautifuloverusedemotion-packed commitment charged the body. love momentarily existed actually transformed us defying the odds flourishingenlarging us if only for seconds seconds that were urgently expected and overneeded. there are rumors afloat that love is ill. intimacy at best is overnight clashes and morning regrets. are bodies underwashed in strange bathrooms as lovers &amp; othersbang the door softly running. steppin cautiously in cracked silence to spread rumorsthat love is a diseased bitch deserving death and quick cremation. do not wait to be loved seek it, the unexplainable. fight for love not knowing whether you have lost or accomplished poetic possibilities. dig deep for love search while acknowledging the complexity of the heart &amp; fading standards. in seeking love use care. to let strangers come into you too quickly may make you a stranger to yourself. from dawn to dusk in cities that sunrises often fail to visit we imprisoned light &amp; generated heat. you are seedless grapes and bright stars at winter &amp; wind. there are voices in your smiles and confirmation in the parting of your lips.
<> But not so melancholy as it seemed, When once you knew him, for his mouth redeemed His insufficient eyes, forever sad: In them there was no life-glimpse, good or bad, Nor joy nor passion in them ever gleamed; His mouth was all of him that ever beamed, His eyes were sorry, but his mouth was glad. He never was a fellow that said much, And half of what he did say was not heard By many of us: we were out of touch With all his whims and all his theories Till he was dead, so those blank eyes of his Might speak them. Then we heard them, every word.
Monk's dissonant hat willing every change of direction; all those influences in your head touching the wrong target  none of this recorded, the ears of the kitchen painted black, all the musicians in common clothes, dressing for the ancestors. You learned to appreciate the pews, the cooling iron, the cooling board where the bodies, guns in the recording studios, became the tuning forks, meals eaten while running in place for Mother and Dad who could dance.
<> As snow upon a mountain, as the rose Red in the middest summer's many greens You were the beauty's final grace, as those. Or as the spire that lifts aloft in heaven, Or as the wind-vane on the spiry peak, Or as the glory glimmering in the sweven, Caught by the dreamer as he wakens weak. Or as the rapture of the heart at breaking, Or Power's last touch, or manhood's winning-place, Even so were you that set the shadows shaking, On ever hurrying sea, to leave no trace. Far, far, away, the men beholding knew A queen the more was passing, seeing you. The west wind blows the smoke among the rain, The rigging drips, the iridescent dock Dimples beneath each following pellet's knock, From each ship's scupper crawls a rusty stain. The winches rattle cargo; from a shoot Coal thunders down; a tugboat threshes past Towing a ship with colours at her mast; An orange-bearer scents the air with fruit. Four boys, two ancient riggers and a mate Heave round upon a capstan, the pawls clink, The gathered heaves of purchase fall and kink, The dangling yard goes up into the sky, Up on its end it goes and swings awry And settles square, and is a crown of state. They reared the pine-tree to its height and held Its slender taper steady with a stay. What Nature could not compass they compelled, There the spar stood, since Nature must obey. Then, turning pride to use, they crossed the yard, Itself a triumph with its manly gear, Theirs was a Queen whom nothing should retard, They set a sail upon the pointing spear: And there it gleamed aloft, below the flag Over strange seas, impelled by many airs. What though the waters raged? What heeds the stag, Running the hills, of stag-hounds, as he fares? He pays no heed, but canters, as did she, Billow by crashing billow, sea by sea.
My rage is more than I can bear in silence. I died once in Pompeii in a gilded bath Wearing only the belt of my servitude. Dense, Dry ash covered my sex and ended my wrath. Now, when the craters of the Spring pour out a path Of seed upon the infertile air, my sense Of things is changed, and my forgotten breath Is an oppression in me, my rage is so intense. I and my friends do not seek a liberation That comes from any kind of knowing. We Avow that we are of nature, and that nothing The Spring blesses is alien from us. The sea Is in our hearts, and the austerity of the gulf's wing Chastens, and uplifts us, and is an invitation.
Even in the middle of the silent firs, The secret world of mushroom and of moss, Where all is delicate and nothing stirs, We get the rumor of those distant wars And the harsh sound of loss. This is an island open to the churning, The boom, the constant cannonade, The turning back of tides and their returning, And ocean broken like some restless mourning That cannot find a bed. Oh love, let us be true then to this will  Not to each other, human and defeated, But to great power, our Heaven and our Hell, That thunders out its triumph unabated, And is never still. For we are married to this rocky coast, To the charge of huge waves upon it, The ceaseless war, the tide gained and then lost, And ledges worn down smooth but not downcast  Wild rose and granite. Here in the darkness of the stillest wood, Absence, the ocean, tires us with its roar; We bear love's thundering rumor in the blood Beyond our understanding, ill or good  Listen, once more!
Leaves fall. The air is full Of the fall of the leaves. The spouts in the eaves Choke with elm, Ash, oak And maple shavings. The yellow rain Seeps to the drain Down the white wall, Whitewash and white Smooth-cast and plaster. The last leaves Leave the tall Bare sycamore And lie on the iron Rails of the square Where rust is brown As a young girl's hair. The leaves lie Over the eyes, Moist yellow eyelids Blear the light, Blind the skies. November fires Burn in gardens And Martinmas turns Oak and ash To ash and smoke. The charred leaves Float in the air; And soot is sharp On the dry tongue. Bright memories Fall through the mind: The yellow carpels Of a flowering youth. And hand on hand, Or mouth on mouth, Find falling leaves Brittle on fingers, Dry on the teeth. In the after-evening The leaves fall Slowly as snow, And bury the night Under yellow drifts In the lamp light.
This last estate of greed has been reclaimed by drone. Slaves crawled down the mountain to the cities, factories with unions and a definite rate of pay. Without indentured help, wells went dry and shafts were left half dug. Exciting endings of old True Detectives are obscured by worms and no two shoes are mates. Only horseflies prospered and they prosper still. Bears will always leave tomorrow's meal. For boredom there are only boring answers. News thirty years ago remains mold-welded to the walls. A lady, known to Butte police as Al, has been arrested with a stolen truck of beer in Boulder. Something about Hitler faded where the rain leaked in. Housewives faded from hard work and harder worry, the baby sick, the gold slow coming and the price of gold sung wrong by men returning early drunk from town. The drone is firm. Heat, a high prop plane and insect hum reclaim five frames of cars stripped clean of everything poverty could use. Bedsprings are for singles. The broken sluice could be the work of lightning or a final rage and what's the difference now? Rats stay on. The road out is the one the ghost took years before his body quit and packed  took off singing morning and did not come back.
The tree of knowledge was the tree of reason. That's why the taste of it drove us from Eden. That fruit was meant to be dried and milled to a fine powder for use a pinch at a time, a condiment. God had probably planned to tell us later about this new pleasure. We stuffed our mouths full of it, gorged on  <> It's toxic in large quantities; fumes swirled in our heads and around us to form a dense cloud that hardened to steel, a wall between us and God, Who was Paradise. Not that God is unreasonable but reason in such excess was tyranny and locked us into its own limits, a polished cell reflecting our own faces. God lives on the other side of that mirror, but through the slit where the barrier doesn't quite touch ground, manages still to squeeze in as filtered light, splinters of fire, a strain of music heard then lost, then heard again.
We present for you this evening A movie of death: observe These scenes chipped celluloid Reveals unsponsored and tax-free. We request these things only: All gum must be placed beneath the seats Or swallowed quickly, all popcorn sacks Must be left in the foyer. The doors Will remain closed throughout The performance. Kindly consult Your programs: observe that There are no exits. This is A necessary precaution. Look for no dialogue, or for the Sound of any human voice: we have seen fit To synchronize this play with Squealings of pigs, slow sound of guns, The sharp dead click Of empty chocolatebar machines. We say again: there are No exits here, no guards to bribe, No washroom windows. No finis to the film unless The ending is your own. Turn off the lights, remind The operator of his union card: Sit forward, let the screen reveal Your heritage, the logic of your destiny.
Standing alone in the fields, Alone I do not feel cold. An old tree, having missed the season of blossoms, Enters dusk at the horizon. The cooking smoke has faded above the peasants' huts, Revealing the golden haystacks in the back. An old peasant in the yard Ties his wheat stalks into bundles of firewood. Chicks linger in the weeds, forgetting to return When the sun shadow reaches the top of the clay wall. Now the old man sits facing the ocean, Watching dusk curdle his garden into a still life. A plough cuts into soil far away, And folds a black pattern onto the empty land. At night I emerge from my body dancing at will, And tell the panicked world I'm just sleepwalking. Stars are visionary notes, eyes drawn upward. Poplars applaud each breeze. Songs make a home at the end of my sight. Wild geese return from the north how their wings stir the air! I pull a feather to measure their routes. Cat Buckwheat crawls among clovers, his white tail knocking dew drops down the symmetrical three-leaves. Among the heated battle between two invisible cats, pear blossoms pour into the blue sky. Action leaks everywhere, like an exposed wire. Words short into silence.
All furniture's gone. It hits me in this light I've always hated thinned the way it is by tiny panes, when I leave now the door will slam no matter how I close it and my groin will throb hungry as these rooms. Someone left the snapshot on the wall, two horses and a man, a barn dark gray against gray light I think was sky but could be eighty years of fading. Once I called that unknown farmer friend. He stared back ignorant and cold until I blushed. What denies me love today helps me hold a job. This narrow space I slept in twenty years, a porch walled in, a room just barely added on. I own this and I know it is not mine. That day I found locked doors in Naples, streets rocked in the sea. The sea rocked in the hands of brutal sky and fish came raining from volcanoes. I see the horses swirl into the barn. I hear two shots, no groans. When I say I'm derelict the horses will return to flank the farmer. Again, the three die gray as April 7, 1892. I'll leave believing we keep all we lose and love. Dirt roads are hard to find. I need to walk one shabby some glamorous way the movies like. I'll rest at creeks. I can't help looking deep for trout in opaque pools. I pass a farm: it's home, eviction papers posted to the door, inside a fat ghost packing wine to celebrate his fear of quarantine, once outside, pleased the road he has to take goes north without an exit ramp, not one sign giving mileage to the end.
This has little to do with the flower except for a man on the far side of the room who has been watching it all night. To concentrate on it from a distance helps him understand the dark-haired girl asleep on the far side of town. In his meditation he has been the plant which blooms in the night desert. He is the survivor in a house of dead relatives. The victim of friends and lovers.  he would always be there. The flower is motionless. It will always be a flower and nothing else, except for the man who draws it in: a part of himself which cares for nothing. The girl might be on the verge of unfolding a new face and she would still mean nothing. He tries to believe what he sees in her. So the love and the meditation go on, turning a white sheet and a girl into a night-blooming cactus. The cactus unfolds to explain something: he sees it take on colors, not of meaning, real colors which mean absolutely nothing. And that, he understands, is what she feels.
A hundred years ago, on coqu&iacute; frog-chanting nights, ancestor Pepaberta would lift the oil lamp and stuff a pistol in her waist for travels to the outhouse leaning between the hills, dueling with rodent viceroys and their insect infantry and no one asked who else. The shots spooked the roosters that hollered in the dark, woke men muttering about the loca who kept their bladders full till morning.
I love all things in miniature   the blue tree whose sprigs are like the lilac's in miniature   and small things too since they recollect a child's eye view  of a small world inside a large in which small things might represent  the large acorn cup a cup, sprig a tree and because miniatures are  fully-formed and in completion futureless, as if childhood itself  were arrested, made redeemable. Lying belly down on grass, level  with a sparrow's eye as it cocks its head, engages without seeing us  I remember how our first lessons were tailored to a scale in which  the child loomed large, creatures small and therefore it was incumbent  on our stature to feel tenderness. I felt it for a moment and have lost it  now that the mind has taken flight left a birdless stretch of grass  so much larger than itself.
I wish I could talk to your body Less cautiously; I mean in a Language as forthright as its Beauty deserves. Of course, When we make love there is the Communication of touch, fingers On Flesh, lips on innermost Flesh, but surely there must be A kind of speech, body in body, That is even deeper than such Surface touching, a language I haven't yet learned or haven't learned well enough, hard as I've tried. Will I ever master That secret language for you?
We sat beneath a webbed and vaulted sky, listening to the mechanical mockingbirds live up to their name. A green and white cab came and waited until the last bullet was swept up and put in a transparent envelope. The old driver puffed on a red cigar which he said he found in the library. Two nurses wrapped me in a pink blanket. The fat one handed my sister a plastic bone. After the bricks unraveled and the tornado collapsed on the outskirts of town, like an old man whose anger has finally stabbed him, the story gets progressively colder. A man stood up and peed in his coffee cup. Wanda got a job with the rodeo as an assistant cook, and Purple Bill finally learned why his neighbors called him &ldquo;Esmerelda Desdemona&rdquo; when he started his fancy jalopy. I could have told you another white lie. I could have heaped it on the mountain gathering before you. Perhaps it would have even been the truth, the whole truth, but I wouldn't have known it, not then and not now. When the air gets thick and stuffy like this my brain turns into a dog dish I circle, my tongue hanging out like a wet flannel sleeve. I wore your underwear to work the other day but it didn't make me feel as sexy as I thought it would. Why have you stopped tapping your foot? I was just beginning to get in the mood to swing down from my branch and sing. That sweet smell is the soup starting to rot. I am, as always, your disobedient servant.
<> <> <> <> <> Intelligence and charm And luck, they will not save Her life from every harm. The lives of children are Dangerous to their parents With fire, water, air, And other accidents; And some, for a child's sake, Anticipating doom, Empty the world to make The world safe as a room. Who could endure the pain That was Laoco&ouml;n's? Twisting, he saw again In the same coil his sons. Plumed in his father's skill, Young Icarus flew higher Toward the sun, until He fell in rings of fire. A man who cannot stand Children's perilous play, With lifted voice and hand Drives the children away. Out of sight, out of reach, The tumbling children pass; He sits on an empty beach, Holding an empty glass. Who said that tenderness Will turn the heart to stone? May I endure her weakness As I endure my own. Better to say goodnight To breathing flesh and blood Each night as though the night Were always only good.
After the first revolution the poets were busier than cabbage moths in the garden. They praised the new nation, the rice paddies, the rumps of the peasants raised skyward as they planted, the new children who would grow up to be literate, have electricity, running water, almost enough to eat. They praised the factories that belonged to everyone, the bolts of black cloth and the shimmering orange tractors that ran like heavy-footed dragons over the earth. After the counterrevolution the poets were excommunicated. They were farmed out as swineherds. They cleaned privies. They swept the aisles of factories. They learned to make light bulbs and fertilizers and little by little they mastered the gray art of ambiguity. Out of the long and complex grasses of their feelings they learned to plait meanings into metaphor. It was heavy weather. After the next revolution it rained melancholy, it is still raining in the poets' garden. But they are planting and busy white moths flutter at random along the orderly rows, a trillion eggs in their ovipositors waiting to hatch into green loopers with fearsome jaws.
My ladies of the dark oak dresser I reached for you above the pewter teapots ribbed like cockles, snaps taken with the first family Kodak six months ago when we were wee. Figurines in mufflers,  <> lowered in a poke bonnet; I remember your petticoats, flower baskets, the delicacy of gloves. Not my Nana scrubbing floors, her fine mantle a gas-light's; the shared lavvy, my hand in her rough fist past the blacked-out stair-head window no one bothered to scrape clean, to welcome a dull sun twenty years since the bombs. The Doultons' heart-shaped faces gazed at summer Downs, sparkly ballrooms. Seized in coy pirouettes, little victims of enchantment, the tenement was condemned. Handed down. On the mattresses of my various floors I saw you trip along lanes, hold tiny parasols against the glare of naked bulbs, peek behind fans in a house where shaven-haired women slept in the same bed, and Jim greased guns for burial in a revolutionary field. One day I smothered them in bubble-wrap, like a mother I read of who smothered her kids for fear of the Bomb, took them back to the safety of my parents' built-in wardrobe, in case they got smashed, little arms and bonnets, parasols and scattered baskets. One day, I said I'll have a calm house, a home suitable for idols; but it hasn't happened yet.
Roses with the scent bred out, In lieu of which is a long name on a label. Dragonflies reverting to grubs, Tundra and desert overcrowded, And in lieu of a high altar Wafers and wine procured by a coin in a slot. On the podium in lieu of a man With fallible hands is ensconced A metal lobster with built-in tempi; The deep-sea fishermen in lieu of Battling with tunny and cod Are signing their contracts for processing plankton. On roof after roof the prongs Are baited with faces, in saltpan and brainpan The savour is lost, in deep Freeze after freeze in lieu of a joint Are piled the shrunken heads of the past And the offals of unborn children. In lieu therefore of choice Thy Will be undone just as flowers Fugues, vows and hopes are undone While the weather is packaged and the spacemen In endless orbit and in lieu of a flag The orator hangs himself from the flagpost.
Some of them write too loud. Some write the mauve poem over and over. In our time a whole tribe have campaigned with noisy boots on  they look swashbuckling but all the syllables finally run and hide. Their swagger makes them feel good, but mobilizes opposition. Listen after a torrent begins even big rocks have to get out of the way, but at the top of the divide you can change Mississippi to Columbia with one finger, and I did. But I didn't want the Pacific this big.
These are the things laid out on the table for my regard: one Red Delicious apple, slightly bruised; two unanswered letters (one air mail); an open paperback Genet, spine broken; a chipped gray sandwich plate, with crumbs. I have no idea what these things should mean. My foolish friend could say, but I've insulted him too many times, and he won't speak today. Past dust on windows I've forgotten once again to wash, clouds float hollow smoke rings against a floodlit temporary sky. How empty those blue eyes, yet everything arrayed upon the varnished wood he sees. It's time to sort the errors into matching tarnished pairs, lined-up wishes saved for warmer weather in a drawer. How clean the kitchen seems in his clear eyes, the boiling water on for tea, the new white cups. When he passes in the hall he doesn't recognize me, though some days he smiles. By spring he will be beautiful, and I astray, invisible by day and nights without a sliver of a moon. I have a friend whose heart is made of porcelain, painted with naked leaves, and when you call his name I turn.
The cripple aches in his lost limb, The old man cries for a dropped dummy, Dawn comes up with muted strings, Spring rides high in a bailiff's van. Blain and dazzle together, together Magnolia in bloom and holly in berry In the writing desk where nothing is written Lurk latchkeys, counterfoils and lockets. The stopnetting sags, the molehills rise, Typewriters ring, opinions wilt, Towers of pennies for spastic children Wobble and crash while the tills ring The Rites of Spring. Over the sticks High horses crash, under the water Black fingers pick at the ocean bed, The whole flat smells of hot cross buns. Peace and rumours of peace. Mechanical Brains compute the chances. Jets Trace on the skies their ads and prayers: Let someone soon make all things new. In spruce new wards new mothers shriek, New vacuum cleaners run amuck, New deaf incapsulated souls Gaze out at noisy birds of dawn; While on a pillar in the sands A gaunt man scours his plinth and hauls His empty basket up and cries: Repent! It is time to round things off.
I know my mind and I have made my choice; Not from your temper does my doom depend; Love me or love me not, you have no voice In this, which is my portion to the end. Your presence and your favours, the full part That you could give, you now can take away: What lies between your beauty and my heart Not even you can trouble or betray. Mistake me not unto my inmost core I do desire your kiss upon my mouth; They have not craved a cup of water more That bleach upon the deserts of the south; Here might you bless me; what you cannot do Is bow me down, who have been loved by you.
Of course you have fought in language for what was real about us, your mama's jim crow fight on Howard's campus, dozens in the half dozen children she bore, your father's facts reborn in you, and you fighting to be born in self, transcending your poems on traintracks bottomless in Foggy Bottom, pain and laughter of your people in your people's word. You sustain us, comic tragedy, yarns, our spayed ancestors, and you their singer. We love you in your unwillingness to apologize for us, for our passing in the great civil war where we understood ourselves, creating ourselves in what our fathers thought, hoped; pickax, gang, field: tongues ungrammatical and wise. You wouldn't let us lose our form, its energy of purpose, the speech of meaning in deeds broken in the written word. And you are broken and remade here in Williamstown, the great wreck of spirit torn into images of what you made in language, the word always ours.
My touch might try to cure But its effect would be Only to restore the dream Toward which my embrace Released you once, the closer That the freer in fantasy You might wander, opening Within my constraint Like a flower to the air. Open like a flower to the air, A lily buoyed on the current in which it moves This way and that, swayed by the slightest shift Yet never turning its gaze to consider its movement; Open like a flower to the air, to the air Without question or doubt
This here's a tale of a sho-nuff man Whut lived one time in the delta lan' His hand was big as a hog's fat ham And he useta work for Uncle Sam. His gums was blue, his voice was mellow And he talked to mules, fellow to fellow. The day he was born in the Mississippi bottom He made a meal on buttermilk and sorghum A mess o' peas and a bait o' tunnips And when he finished he smacked his lips And went outside to help pick cotton. And he growed up taller than a six-foot shooter Skinnin' mules and catchin' barracuda And stronger than a team of oxen And he even could beat the champion boxin' An' ain't nary man in Dixie's forgotten How he could raise two bales of cotton While one hand anchored down the steamboat. Oh, they ain't no tale was ever wrote 'Bout Big John Henry that could start to tell All the things that Big Boy knowed so well: How he learned to whistle from the whippoorwills, And turned the wheels whut ran the mills; How the witches taught him how to cunjer, And cyo the colic and ride the thunder; And how he made friends with a long lean houn' Sayin', &ldquo;It's jes' John Henry a-giftin' roun'.&rdquo; But a ten-poun' hammer done ki-ilt John Henry Yeah, a ten-poun' hammer ki-ilt John Henry, Bust him open, wide Lawd! Drapped him ovah, wide Lawd! Po' John Henry, he cold and dead.
There is a well into whose bottomless eye, Though I were flayed, I dare not lean and look, Sweet once with mountain water, now gone dry, Miraculously abandoned by the brook Wherewith for years miraculously fed It kept a constant level cold and bright, Though summer parched the rivers in their bed; Withdrawn these waters, vanished overnight. There is a word I dare not speak again, A face I never again must call to mind; I was not craven ever nor blenched at pain, But pain to such degree and of such kind As I must suffer if I think of you, Not in my senses will I undergo.
In the dark town, out side the big city in the dark town, the houses were pretty in the dark town, whitey slept on television all his women dead to the vision. in the dark town, where three men waited rain moon spun across the hot sky in the dark town, the murderers rested and looked at the things they hated. When the sun in the dark town came up three policemen staggered on their eyeballs they lay dead in the cold new sun they lay dead in the cold new sun And when the wind blew it was clean, and the walkers moved on to another scene
In the winter of sorrow  I looked in my glass  (And I measured my glass): I saw the years vanish,  I saw my youth pass. In the spring of disorder  I gazed in the lake  (It was blood-crimson lake) I saw the buds shatter,  I saw my heart break. In the summer of ardour  I bent to the rose  (And it stirred and it rose): I prised its lips open  To drain my repose. In the autumn of crispness  I saw my sheaves bound  (And moved back with a bound): The sun in its circus  Completed its round. A late bird is flying  To finish it all  (I did finish it all): Now one last cadenza,  The fortunate fall.
<> Remember gardens shimmering in the sun, Doorways in shadow, and the peaceful duties Of women there. If this is to be done, Let it be done without the shame of pride, That in an hour to come our unbelieving Sons, judging us, must say: &ldquo;The cities died; Our fathers did this, but they did it grieving.&rdquo; For with the cities die the guiltless dreams Of all the brave, the innocent unwary, Who long ago, pausing by unnamed streams, Began to build the tall and visionary Cities that were to be their children's shroud. Destroying them at last, do not be proud.
When he has done, he scrubs it clean And lays it out on polythene. Summer heat. He has a smoke And takes a drink of rum and coke. Extinguishing his fag, he turns To view the day's work and concerns: Too much head-blood might come out And spread beyond the bags. A doubt. He lays some more. He hears below The unknown tenant's stereo. He lets no other voices in, No names or titles for his sin. At least for now he must maintain The single rhythm in his brain. He turns the body on its back, Its white skin marvellous on the black. Still. No modern Frankenstein's Hands are palping for the lines. Steadying it, he holds a hip And runs the knife up like a zip. The London suburbs stretch and doze For miles in sluggish roads and rows. It comes apart. A loud exhaust. A child shouts out for something lost. Silence is a gentle hiss. He wonders how it came to this.
The Dawn! the Dawn, the crimson-tinted comes Out of the low still skies, over the hills, New York's fantastic spires and cheerless domes,  The Dawn ! my spirit to its spirit thrills. Almost the mighty city is asleep, No pushing crowd, no tramping, tramping feet; But here and there a few cars, groaning, creep Along, above and underneath the street, Bearing their strangely-ghostly burdens by,  The women and the men of garish nights, Their eyes wine-weakened and their clothes awry, Nodding under the strong electric lights. On through the waning shadows of New York, Before the Dawn, I wend my way to work.
The new ergonomics were delivered just before lunchtime so we ignored them. Without revealing the particulars let me just say that lunch was most satisfying. Jack and Roberta went with the corned beef for a change. Jack believes in alien abduction and Roberta does not, although she has had several lost weekends lately and one or two unexplained scars on her buttocks. I thought I recognized someone from my childhood at a table across the room, the same teeth, the same hair, but when he stood up, I wasn't sure, Squid with a red tie? Impossible. I finished my quiche lorraine and returned my thoughts to Jack's new jag: &ldquo;Well, I guess anything's possible. People disappear all the time, and most of them have no explanation when and if they return. Look at Tony's daughter and she's never been the same.&rdquo; Jack was looking as if he'd bet on the right horse now. &ldquo;And these new ergonomics, who really designed them? Does anybody know? Do they tell us anything? A name, an address? Hell no.&rdquo; Squid was paying his bill in a standard-issue blue blazer. He looked across the room at me several times. He looked tired, like he wanted to sleep for a long time in a barn somewhere, in Kansas. I wanted to sleep there, too.
The ancient texts will give you plenty of reasons there is no God or if there were how he would not be half inclined to think of you, or to have made the world and you in the first place. He'd have no interest at all in Matter, having none of his own to slow him on his perpetual ethereal travels. Come to think of it, he wouldn't bother to travel. Those wits who sat in caves among carvings had time on their hands, so they went on to argue the opposite  how each effect naturally is caused by something we have to call God or Krishna or Brahma or Rama simply because he seems to have thought of everything, then some more like earthquakes, floods, and the savage disasters man makes up as if by himself. Moreover, God maybe gave monsters and devils and Ravana, the ten- headed warrior. These assiduous monks before they were done filled their caves knee-high with pure logic. And sculptors carved the walls round, their dust drifting on manuscripts. They created stone women and angels, believable visions of lovers. A man can still, in fact, fall hard for a woman in stone, archaic and chipped, with a body a million times kissed. Today the silence hums over the hazed canyon. Sacred river still cuts deep into bedrock beneath wading lepers. And above the mouth of each cave, where a monk spun out reasons and doubts, black bees swarm at their work now, making honey that drops from wax cells. These bees could trace their births back to Ashoka, that great Buddhist king who left road signs for reaching Nirvana, state of bliss like a city of swans and souls without purpose, with eight noble paths and no more. A ninth would break a saint with a feather, he who had taken a decade to learn each of the four noble truths, he who had nearly missed the path altogether, but found it in the dead end of a silent dark cave.
They found him sitting in a chair: continual and rigid ease poured downward through his lips and heart, entered his veins and spread until paralysis possessed his knees. The evanescent liquid still bubbling overflows the glass; and no one hears the telephone ringing while friends and strangers pass. Call taxis, wake the coroner, police: the young ex-millionaire is dead. Examine unpaid bills  insurance blanks and cheques unfold from refuse in a right-hand drawer to read before the body's cold, lifelike, resembling what we were: erect, alert, the sun-tanned head. Polo or golf this afternoon, and night, the country club or bar? &ldquo;Drink Death to end all poverty: two millions gone  and stir no more.&rdquo; Because I know his kind too well I knew his fears and the release of energy that thinned his blood was no certificate of peace, but like communiques in war. The startled Scapegoat sought his way to safe oblivion that lured him, made his life intact, immured his debts and tricked old friends. I hear his voice: I wake to hear storm-tilted echoes of his name. It is his death again: the same sleek ambulance throbs at his door.
It starts with a bump, a tiny bump, deep in the throat. The mockingbird knows: she spreads it around Like music, like something she's heard, a gossip to be Repeated, but not believed. And the bump grows, and the song grows, the song Ascendant and self-reflective, its notes Obscuring the quarter-tone, the slick flesh and the burning. And the bump drops off and disappears, but Its roots do not disappear they dig on through the moist meat. The roots are worms, worms in a cheese. And what they leave, in their blind passage, Filtered, reorganized, is a new cheese, a cheese For one palate and one tongue. But this takes time, and comes later, The small mounds, heaps of a requisite sorrow, Choked and grown in the beds, The channels no longer channels, but flesh of a kind Themselves, the same flesh and the song ... Midnight again, the mockingbird, high In the liquidambar, runs through her scales. What burdens Down-shift and fall, their weights sprung: The start, the rise, the notes Oil for the ear of death, oil for the wind, the corpse Sailing into the universe, the geranium ... The music, like high water, rises inexorably ... Toward heaven, that intergalactic queasiness Where all fall to the same riff. Tallow, tallow and ash. The fire winds Like a breath through the bone, a common tune, Hummable, hard to extrapolate: That song again, the song of burnt notes. The blue it rises into, the cobalt, Proves an enduring flame: Persian death bowl, The bead, crystal And drowned delta, Ephesian reed. Blue of the twice-bitten rose, blue of the dove ...
There are some things that entertain me more Than men or books; and to my knowledge seem A key of Poetry, made of magic lore Of childhood, opening many a fabled door Of superstition, mystery, and dream  Enchantment locked of yore. For, when through dusking woods my pathway lies, Often I feel old spells, as o'er me flits The bat, like some black thought that, troubled, flies Round some dark purpose; or before me cries The owl that, like an evil conscience, sits,  A shadowy voice and eyes. Then, when down blue canals of cloudy snow The white moon oars her boat, and woods vibrate With crickets, lo, I hear the hautboys blow Of Elfland; and, when gold the fireflies glow, See where the goblins hold a Fairy F&ecirc;te  With many a lanthorn-row. Strange growths, that ooze from long-dead logs and spread A creamy fungus, where the snail, uncoiled, And fat slug feed at morn, are Pixy bread Made of the yeasted dew; the lichens red, Beside these grown, are meat the Brownies broiled  Above a glow-worm bed. The smears of silver on the webs that line The knuckled roots, or stretch, white-wov'n, within The hollow stump, are stains of Faery wine Spilled on the cloth where Elfland sat to dine, When night beheld them drinking, chin to chin,  Of th' moon's fermented shine. What but their chairs the mushrooms on the lawn, Or toadstools hidden under flower and fern, Tagged with the dotting dew! With knees updrawn Far as his eyes, have I not come upon Puck seated there? but scarcely round could turn  When, presto! he was gone. And so though Science from the woods hath tracked The Elfin; and with prosy lights of day Unhallowed all his haunts; and, dulling, blacked Our vision, still hath Beauty never lacked For seers yet; who, in some wizard way,  Prove fancy real as fact.
He sounds like just the man. I'll have him here. His genius deserves a wider sphere. I wrote to Voltaire, why not try for Burns? He'll serve me, yes he will, he'll serve my turns! What could he miss? He'll be at home with us. Cold blasts? An unmistakable plus. Strong drink? We'll toast him under the table. Superstitions? We've reams of myth and fable. They say he's rather hard on royalty. Well well, but that was France, we'll see, we'll see. In any case, I want to pick his brains On profitable subjects, crops and drains, To take steps to improve the steppes (I must Stop this word-play) which are more  Than waving stalks (yes, I've been reading Scotch), Scotch stalks, ha ha, I really ought to watch This tongue of mine, it must be the new year Or the full moon or getting into gear To send a letter to Caledonia. I don't need either onions or ammonia To get my eyes to glisten when I think Of Rob I know he isn't Rabbie and clink My bracelets and my ambers and twitch my gown And scratch an impatient pen and throw it down And pick it up again and make myself proper To write a dignified yet piquant offer. (What I did not say was how we'd take a sleigh, The two of us, one tingling frosty day, With trusty driver, trusty horse, and skim The wolfish forest paths, I'd sing to him, He'd sing to me, we'd both be wrapped in sable, Wishing the swishing tracks interminable. And if his hand should creep into my muff, That would be nice, that would be nice enough. I did not say that there are joys and joys. You get so tired of raw-boned stable-boys, A jump, a thrust, a grunt, and  I'd rather sleep with Anna or with Tanya! I'm only joking. But a clean and witty farmer Might be my last and unresisted charmer. All this I did not write, but he can read Between the lines, for his need is my need.)
<> Light six white tapers with the Flame of Art, Send incense wreathing to the lily flowers, And, with your cool hands white, Swing the warm censer round my bruised heart, Drop, dove-grey eyes, your penitential showers On this pale acolyte. <> The tall red house soars upward to the stars, The doors are chased with sardonyx and gold, And in the long white room Thin drapery draws backward to unfold Cadogan Square between the window-bars And Whistler's mother knitting in the gloom. <> How many hearts turn Motherward to-day? (Red roses faint not on your twining stems!) Bronze triptych doors unswing! Wait, restive heart, wait, rounded lips, to pray, Mid beaten copper interset with gems Behold! Behold! your King!
Hanging in midair the web is a batik of sunlight and air; a thin chalk drawing scribbled on the wind. And wind is kind to it; leaves it a name in ancient saliva that anyone literate in this language can read, the hieroglyphics of a life this side of the river, details in a week's worth of weaving, in a voice shrill and exquisite like a market woman's, a natural grafitti, clandestine and superb in incandescent tongues a convex collection of vigilante moonbeams turning to sun. What ancestral sarcophagus has come unwrapped in this american autumn where refugee birds tunnel through air and quit this disquiet place before some loping lie swallows them whole? What serenity does sister-weaver know who spun off from the stippled sign of the adult education center to batik her name and mine like a confident prayer on the wind? How has she done this? How can this be, but From the ground up. To the middle branch of the ash tree. Leaving a silver banister for me.
When we two walked At the dawn of day Our happiness then Was as frail a spray As the nostril-fume Of the cows that came Through the milk-mist At milking-time. How could I guess What you meant then? Juno, Demeter, You called me when Our clay unclouded In dawn's chill gleams. I was ignorant still Of the soul's names. But when you spoke Of that far hour When resurrection Touched beast and flower My simple faith Understood you then. Oh had you but pardoned <>
I went at dawn across the town. Half empty, the bus jerked, jolted, swung my dream along till I reached the place. We stood face to face but she looked down. Desire was naked in my glance; it stripped her of all pretence. Would she come? Tonight? She would come. Tonight. No, I am not the stereotype nor she the wanton one. One faith we shared in common, that step by step it was bound to happen, our lives being open. Now we are exact in love's determined thrust, then in quietude of mutual need.
I want to make a sonnet that's not a sonnet according to any civilized notion of what that is. I want it ugly as concrete, and just about impossible to read. And I'd like my sonnet in the future to give no living soul an ounce of pleasure, not by being merely foulmouthed and perverse but also (why not?) by being both and worse if it feels the urge. Plus I want the whole thing caustic and obtrusive with intent to pierce and hurt like stitches done without anaesthetic somewhere tender. So it won't be learnt by heart. So it's a wall with a hole pissed through in the hole a star transmitting incomprehensible clarity.
He noted from the hill top, Fixing a cynic eye upon The stranger in the distance Up the green track approaching, She had a sure and eager tread; He guessed mere grace of body Which would not for unloveliness Of cheek or mouth or other feature Retribution pay. He watched as she came closer, And half-incredulously saw How lovely her face also, Her hair, her naked hands. Come closer yet, deception! But closer as she came, the more Unarguable her loveliness; He frowned and blushed, confessing slowly, No, it was no cheat. To find her foolish-hearted Would rid his baffled thought of her; But there was wisdom in that brow Of who might be a Muse. Then all abashed he dropped his head: For in his summer haughtiness He had cried lust at her for whom Through many deaths he had kept vigil, Wakeful for her voice.
The verb &lsquo;to think&rsquo; Is represented by the same sign as &lsquo;To yearn for&rsquo;, &lsquo;to be sad&rsquo;, &lsquo;To be unable to forget&rsquo; In many cases &lsquo;To love&rsquo; is rendered as &lsquo;to like&rsquo; (Thus, a man is said to &lsquo;like&rsquo; his wife) The symbol for &lsquo;feeling&rsquo; also signifies &lsquo;A certificate of merit&rsquo;. It is meritorious to feel, Though &lsquo;to love&rsquo; is more often &lsquo;to like&rsquo; For love comes in two forms alone: That of a mother for her child And carnal The verb &lsquo;to do&rsquo; is homophonous with The verb &lsquo;to pick someone's pocket&rsquo;. This, we should note, is not (As it is in some languages) slang Slang would be to say that you &lsquo;love&rsquo; Someone or something when more properly You &lsquo;like&rsquo; The verb &lsquo;to be&rsquo; Seems not to exist. Yet you cannot say that the verb &lsquo;to be&rsquo; Does not seem &lsquo;to be&rsquo; &lsquo;To be sad&rsquo; does not imply &lsquo;to be&rsquo;, It implies &lsquo;to think&rsquo;. &lsquo;To think&rsquo; is &lsquo;to yearn for&rsquo;, &lsquo;to be without&rsquo;, And to be a man of feeling is to be certified. &lsquo;To like&rsquo; is more common than &lsquo;to love&rsquo; And &lsquo;to be&rsquo; is most uncommon  Unwise it is, in the long watches, When the leaves litter the misty streets, To be reading a Japanese lexicon And to be unable to forget.
I model myself after someone I made up at ten walking the mazes of my medieval city's streets, a being so light, so bright, so fast, so generous and so complete he almost had no body, only a black hat. Furthermore he appeared only in the rain. To this day he cannot be mauled because he is both outside &amp; in. When I think of him I feel the sorrow of my later models. The word was a worthy model once when I had a typewriter. Modelling is a warm march through grace without recourse. Only the loveliest and strongest models run the course. There is a rush to model and new models are proposed. But there isn't a country where there are no models. There is no rock that will not model, or sand or fruit. The shadow in my blood will model for a fee. And yet a lake of absent possibilities has risen to the chin of the folk, and the waters keep rising for what could be a model drowning. I conversed with the drownees. What they said turned my love for myself into syllables. Will I be a model for my son or only endless buzzing?
No sunset, but a grey, great, struggling sky Full of strong silence.In green cloisters throng Shy nuns of evening, telling beads of song. Swallows, like winged prayers, soar steadily by, Hallowing twilight.From the faint and high, Night waves her misting censers, and along The world, the singing rises into strong, Pure peace.Now earth and heaven twain raptures die. I knew your presence in the twilight mist, In the world-filling darkness, in the rain That spoke in whispers, for the world was kissed And laid in sleep. These wild, sweet, perfect things Are little miracles your memory sings, Till heart on heart makes us one music again.
so on to entity incarnadine elicit succor consequent state soul echelon stance roadside tree compose sonorities past sense as compass new a ball propose thrown now in azimuth machinery suspended view through keeps unveiled interior blaze lost kingdom come a blink ago to so on
Great Aunt Agnes, with whose saintly name Very little indeed will rhyme, Gave me at my cavernous cold-water Christening An appropriate gold cross but later on when no one was listening Led me very secretly to understand that my cross was no ordinary Christian Thing I must bear, but one pagan, strange and in fact Egyptian: An ankh For which I must thank Her and the Lady with whom she travelled all about the earth Being a Lady's maid in her narrow ship's berth. I do thank her For this rose-engrav&eacute;d anchor Which, when my soul-boat is all battered and adrift On the unfathomable seas, finds a tiny cleft Like the one in Rock-of-Ages-cleft-for-me And fixes itself in there strongly And makes an inviolable rocking home Of my soul-boat until the seas are good and calm. Ankh means life, says my Concise Oxford Dictionary And I wonder why there is as yet no Insurance Company With such a sturdy helpful name. Perhaps I will start one. Great Aunt Agnes used to comb My unholy difficult hair Saying what-lovely-curls until I would have hit her Except she always gave me a threepenny bit for my tin bank With which I intend to start an Insurance Company called Ankh.
Yet all those other hours are so much here With a particular and proper light As if time folded them in shining cloth, Packed from the moth in attics of the night. Here I must climb again, again the stair, A creaking, crazy winding cylinder, Up to the loft, where all those loves are laid. Here this love's laid: and I afraid of her Because the light is fading on her hair And on the waning of our urgency, As if the sea should fail upon the coast, Fail like a ghost, the cruel persistent sea Folded of memories that are the wear Of those hours in the attic of the mind: I call it mind or night; it is the fall Of day's bright wall, and warns us we are blind And have no feeling sight to stroke the bare Bland and resistant nothingness that is The hollow house of shape, untenanted After we shed our sensualities. Mind or night climbs. Seeks penetration where (Great source and absence of all images!) Its own light fills the darkness that it is, Its own solidities its emptiness. For all these other hours are so much here And here or nowhere are the fled loves found ... Either all power upon this platform lies Or horror cries from the corrupting ground. Even here quick love must climb again the stair, This quick hour climbing. A shivering youth and old, Let me not totter now and fall from fear, Your fire here kill me, dear: not there that cold.
Everything is threatened, but meanwhile everything presents itself: the trees, that day and night steadily stand there, amassing lifetimes and moss, the bushes eager with buds sharp as green pencil-points. Bark of cedar, brown braids, bark of fir, deep-creviced, winter sunlight favoring here a sapling, there an ancient snag, ferns, lichen. And the lake always ready to change its skin to match the sky's least inflection. Everything answers the rollcall, and even, as is the custom, speaks for those that are gone.  Clearly, beyond sound: that revolutionary &lsquo;
Restless and hot two children lay  Plagued with uneasy dreams, Each wandered lonely through false day,  A twilight torn with screams. True to the bed-time story, Ben  Pursued his wounded bear, Ann dreamed of chattering monkey men,  Of snakes twined in her hair. . . . Now high aloft above the town  The thick clouds gather and break, A flash, a roar, and rain drives down:  Aghast the young things wake, Trembling for what their terror was,  Surprised by instant doom, With lightning in the looking-glass,  Thunder that rocks the room. The monkeys' paws patter again,  Snakes hiss and flash their eyes: The bear roars out in hideous pain:  Ann prays: her brother cries. They cannot guess, could not be told  How soon comes careless day, With birds and dandelion gold,  Wet grass, cool scents of May.
When an archer is shooting for nothing He has all his skill. If he shoots for a brass buckle He is already nervous. If he shoots for a prize of gold He goes blind Or sees two targets  He is out of his mind! His skill has not changed. But the prize Divides him. He cares. He thinks more of winning Than of shooting  And the need to win Drains him of power.
The Virgin of the Roses has my mother's face in this painting stolen then returned to the small chapel in Colmar I visit by pure accident. She has my mother's face. And there is a child on her lap who could be my infant brother, dead in some life before my own but never mentioned. There is a fence of roses behind them like the one we had behind our house  each rose a silent, scented mouth each thorn a memory to tempt and tear the flesh. It will be hard for me to leave this church, an extra parting. There was a girl in the Bronx when I was growing up who heard the Virgin call to her. &ldquo;The Catholics,&rdquo; my mother said when they built a shrine of artificial flowers there. Now I see in Mary's plush, brocaded robe the robes my mother wore for Sunday brunch, and I search among the painted folds for secrets she might have kept like handkerchiefs, secrets beyond theology, that woman elegant as Schongauer painted her, stolen by death and only returned to me in dreams and longings and here in mystery.
When my Uncle came to visit us He brought cigars and a jug of wine And a mule he had just invented Round dark he put the mule on the grass Near the porchsteps and soon it commenced To walk up a rope into the sky Then a speck moved across Sheliak While almond-green Nath and Menkar A moment later felt new tin hooves And all the heavens I swear flapped like Some delighted bird with glowing eyes Fixed down on our bedazzlated faces In the excitement Betelgeuse fell And Uncle Pluddie burnt a big hole Clear through his favorite yellow duck Pants. By three o'clock the wine ran out And we were all a little wondrous About when that damn mule would get back I went in the house for some reason or other And when I got out there was my Uncle at The rope helping it down. It looked tired.
Clustered in a mallee ash, swinging upside down and exposing the red heart of confidence, these  Blue Mountain king parrots behave according to their listing in  <>  wealth of wet sclerophyll  forest, they remain high in the grey deadwood. Indigenous and content, even the threat of diminishing habitat fails to dislodge them. Once, I saw a pair of king parrots where they should not have been. It was between  Wandering and Williams. They were feeding on a corrugated gravel road with a small flock of regent parrots   as we call them back home.  It was sultry weather and the moisture suggested the colours of each species ran like waterpaint over the yellow grain spilled from the backs of loosely tarped trucks. Stephen  said he had seen a few around over the years. The farmer at Happy Valley reckoned they'd have escaped from aviaries.  Driving home on the same  road I found the remnants of a flock of  travelling vehicle. In the centre, one orange heart was exposed, its partner nowhere to be seen.  The landscape I come from is often perceived as  of a chainsaw as it tears into mallee ash,  an orange symphony  of king parrots straining to make itself heard high overhead, that is more <>
Storm lifts from Wales And blows dark over England, And over my head As I stand above the Teme, And look out across Ludlow and the dark castle, And the ringing church tower. Clear bells on the storm, And grey rain on the river, And me where I will not come again, And pain I doubt that formal poet ever knew Who wrote &ldquo;This is me&rdquo; Anent the page of one too cowardly to love. Ache and hunger fill the lives Of those who dare not give or take. Misery is all the lot of the unlovable ones, And of rejected lovers, But not one of these knows the empty, horror Of the slow conquering, long fought off, Realization that love assumed and trusted Through years of mutual life Had never been there at all. The bells of St. Lawrence Sprinkle their music over the town. Silver drops, gathered in Bermuda, Shimmer and are lost in the brown English water. It is all just like the poet said.
Carved in the silence by the hand of Pain, And made more perfect by the gift of Peace, Than if Delight had bid your sorrow cease, And brought the dawn to where the dark has lain, And set a smile upon your lips again; Oh strong and noble! Tho' your woes increase, The gods shall hear no crying for release, Nor see the tremble that your lips restrain. Alone as all the chosen are alone, Yet one with all the beauty of the past; A sister to the noblest that we know, The Venus carved in Melos long ago, Yea, speak to her, and at your lightest tone, Her lips will part and words will come at last.
<>  Still shake the trees their tresses grey? I thought their beauty might have died  Since I had been away. I might have known the things I love,  The winds, the flocking birds' full cry, The trees that toss, the downs that move,  Were longer things than I. Lo, earth that bows before the wind,  With wild green children overgrown, And all her bosoms, many-whinned,  Receive me as their own. The birds are hushed and fled: the cows  Have ceased at last to make long moan. They only think to browse and browse  Until the night is grown. The wind is stiller than it was,  And dumbness holds the closing day. The earth says not a word, because  It has no word to say. The dear soft grasses under foot  Are silent to the listening ear. Yet beauty never can be mute,  And some will always hear.
Wing Wong,uninterred at twice fortyeight,succeeded in producing sixtyfour maxims whose)centripetal wisdom in thirtytwo seconds centrifugally is refuted by these( particularly belonging to a retired general)sixteen years of rapid animal whose swir -ling(not too frequently )skirt exhumes(which buries again quick- ly its self in)while a transparent blouse even recklessly juggles the jouncing fruit of eager bosoms&rdquo; Wing Wong
<>  Morning and midnight, to and fro, Still was the room where his days he spent,  And the stars were bleak, and the nights were slow. Year after year, with his dream shut fast,  He suffered and strove till his eyes were dim, For the love that his brushes had earned at last,  And the whole world rang with the praise of him. But he cloaked his triumph, and searched, instead,  Till his cheeks were sere and his hairs were gray. &ldquo;There are women enough, God knows,&rdquo; he said ...  &ldquo;There are stars enough when the sun's away.&rdquo; Then he went back to the same still room  That had held his dream in the long ago, When he buried his days in a nameless tomb,  And the stars were bleak, and the nights were slow. And a passionate humor seized him there   Seized him and held him until there grew Like life on his canvas, glowing and fair,  A perilous face and an angel's too. Angel and maiden, and all in one,   All but the eyes. They were there, but yet They seemed somehow like a soul half done.  What was the matter? Did God forget? ... But he wrought them at last with a skill so sure  That her eyes were the eyes of a deathless woman,  With a gleam of heaven to make them pure,  And a glimmer of hell to make them human. God never forgets. And he worships her  There in that same still room of his, For his wife, and his constant arbiter  Of the world that was and the world that is. And he wonders yet what her love could be  To punish him after that strife so grim; But the longer he lives with her eyes to see,  The plainer it all comes back to him.
November opens the sky. I look out On an immense perimeter of ocean, blue On every side, through the great oak That screens it off all summer, see surf Edging the rocks white on the other side. The November muse who is with me now Gives me wisdom and laughter, also clarity. Aware of old age for the first time, accept That I am old, and this sudden passion must be A single sharp cry, torn out of me, as when A few days ago on the ferry to Vancouver I saw an eagle fly down in a great arc, His fierce head flashing white among the gulls. The ardor of seventy years seizes the moment And must be held free, outside time, Must learn to bear with the cleared space, The futureless flame, and use it well, Must rejoice in the still, quiet air And this ineluctable solitude.
You were a beautiful child With troubled face, green eyelids And black lace stockings We met in a filthy bar You said &ldquo;My name is Nada I don't want anything from you I will not take from you I will give you nothing&rdquo; I took you home down alleys Splattered with moonlight and garbage and cats To your desolate disheveled room Your feet were dirty The lacquer was chipped on your fingernails We spent a week hand in hand Wandering entranced together Through a sweltering summer Of guitars and gunfire and tropical leaves And black shadows in the moonlight A lifetime ago
Whatever we knew we forgot sometime ago trying to track the noun to tell the adjective from it (spiral down) Our song is larger than life (which is a bitch if you live it but then it don't strike twice it's the lyric which is us which is also life but we've been carried away in what's become a mindless tune. It's as though the song's more important than us. I never never thought to sing this song The adjective the noun the tongue the drum the spiral the ... I'm talkin about more than just love. But then I think you knew that.
To be carried Good luck of skin Charmed roadside noise Not to be plucked Turn to me As crows turn in midflight And sketch an ocean Over that curve of shoulder With your eye Sheer luck in Aries Rebellious mellifluous Insist on taking out the thorn Let me be carried Ribbonlike from your tongue As if by language Fabulous A fathomless interruption For it is both a tingling and a light The difference is feeling The simultaneous inscribe the soul It will become very quiet Encourage it You have an eloquent tongue Thrum it and it will leap To its massive shudder What the exterior beckons Shape note singing precise plant Starlight and the mountainous Psalm grow-up-quick-of-butterfly Colored wing-spreading eye A noise cracks and creaks and is a nonsense A noise is a nonsense cracks and creaks Glossed shadow mental stills tarot Black on black lake on lake marble marble Of women saturated and rich <> <> My shells, my shy girls Give me a shadow touch me with light The dream of my life is to throw myself The color of Warhol's people I want to eat my life Beauty monument design If I'm not up by 11:30 don't wake me
What time are the big people going to come back? Blind Santiago is striking six and already it's very dark. Mother said that she wouldn't be delayed. Aguedita, Nativa, Miguel, be careful of going over there, where doubled-up griefs whimpering their memories have just gone toward the quiet poultry yard, where the hens are still getting settled, who have been startled so much. We'd better just stay here. Mother said that she wouldn't be delayed. And we shouldn't be sad. Let's go see the boats mine is prettier than anybody's!  we were playing with them the whole blessed day, without fighting among ourselves, as it should be: they stayed behind in the puddle, all ready, loaded with pleasant things for tomorrow. Let's wait like this, obedient and helpless, for the homecoming, the apologies of the big people, who are always the first to abandon the rest of us in the house  as if we couldn't get away too! Aguedita, Nativa, Miguel? I am calling, I am feeling around for you in the darkness. Don't leave me behind by myself, to be locked in all alone.
When the Chinook comes again in January and Blows the ice floes off Baseline and Arapahoe I ride the tract flats of the East trying to understand The long slide show of history now almost through. From this hill you can see the blinking signal of the laser Beam plant in Platteville. Rocky Flats' stacks are visible. The whole front range is perpendicular Reality from here. It is a blinding wall Of bad intent that hints at terrible events By its mere propinquity. &ldquo;From this rock,&rdquo; It seems to say, &ldquo;will issue the burning consequence Of a series of principles all equally idiotic.&rdquo; And still in waiting for the holy Fire to consume it, this three hundred mile long Stretch of prairie becomes Strip City slowly And without taste from Pueblo to Wyoming. So is it goodbye, civilization? That's the question These plains silently address. That, and who will care for these people When the wind that moves across the desert like a great lion Is all that remains of the Blue Hotel?
 laughing to find anyone's blind (like me like you) except in snow  a whom we make (of grin for smile whose head's his face with stones for eyes for mind with none) boy after girl each brings a world to build our clown  shouting to see what no mind knows a mindless he begins to guess what no tongue tells (such as ourselves) begins to sing an only grin  dancing to feel nots are their whys stones become eyes locks open keys haven't is have doubt and believe (like me like you) vanish in so  laughing to find a noone's more by far than you're alive or i'm  crying to lose (as down someone who's we ungrows) a dream in the rain
<> And in the morning glow, You walked a way beside me To make me sad to go. Do you know me in the gloaming, Gaunt and dusty grey with roaming? Are you dumb because you know me not, Or dumb because you know? All for me? And not a question For the faded flowers gay That could take me from beside you For the ages of a day? They are yours, and be the measure Of their worth for you to treasure, The measure of the little while That I've been long away.
What catches the eye the quick hand reaches toward Or plotting brain circuitously secures, The will is not required, is not our lord, We seek nor flee not pleasure nor pain of ours. The bullet flies the way the rifle's fired, Then what is this unreasonable excess, Our needless quality, this unrequired Exception in the world, this consciousness? Our nerves and brain have their own chemic changes, This springs of them yet surely it stands outside. It feeds in the same pasture and it ranges Up and down the same hills, but unallied, However symbiotic, with the cells That weave tissues and lives. It is something else. As if there were two Gods: the first had made All visible things, waves, mountains, stars and men, The sweet forms dancing on through flame and shade, The swift messenger nerves that sting the brain, The brain itself and the answering strands that start Explosion in the muscles, the indrinking eye Of cunning crystal, the hands and feet, the heart And feeding entrails, and the organs that tie The generations into one wreath, one strand; All tangible things or chemical processes Needs only brain and patience to understand: Then the other God comes suddenly and says &ldquo;I crown or damn, I have different fire to add. These forms shall feel, ache, love, grieve and be glad.&rdquo; There is the insolence, there is the sting, the rapture. By what right did that fire-bringer come in? The uncalled for God to conquer us all and capture, Master of joy and misery, troubler of men. Still we divide allegiance: suddenly An August sundown on a mountain road The marble pomps, the primal majesty And senseless beauty of that austerer God Come to us, so we love him as men love A mountain, not their kind: love growing intense Changes to joy that we grow conscious of: There is the rapture, the sting, the insolence. ..... Or mourn dead beauty a bird-bright-May-morning: The insufferable insolence, the sting.
He moves about his traps of light, This errant and unerring thing, To catch the dust with double paws Or damsel flies upon the wing,  And certain of his small terrain  Will cut and run and twist again To take, as due, bread from the hand, Or flash his coat of cinnamon Across cut grass and sun-stroked stone, His come and go, his came and gone  Exacting from the summer air  A sense of being here, and there; Or sleeps, as if that sleep was all That sleep could be: a loose repose Where all the garden's coloured quilts Conspire about him to disclose  Their buzz and bloom, confusion clear  To one inconstant pricking ear. In all these rituals and rounds Each sinew, nerve and sense agrees That his mysterious web of life Should traffic in simplicities,  And offer belly, throat and paw  As hostages to human law, As if such trust were possible, As if his amber, secret eyes Held nothing in their narrow glass Of revelation, or disguise:  Clay woven into voice and purr,  Caressing hand and molten fur.
You are teaching my daughter the language of the stars, the whole sky glazed with them in freezing Wisconsin, and both your faces tilted up as though you were reading, were trying to learn by heart the night's illuminated pages. I picture her putting her eye to a telescope and seeing her first close-up of what I still call the heavens. It must have been like seeing a man's face (yours) stubbled and cratered, an eyelash length away. She was a most inventive child. Now she gives the spin of reality to her made-up worlds, while you, fledgling astronomer, make real worlds with their long itineraries of light seem touched with phantasy. I want to tell you both how a moment ago there were snow showers here, though the sun is back now, and the grass remains a frozen, spiky green. But just a moment ago the sky seemed to release entire galaxies, and stars or star-shaped flakes, whatever that charged and bridal whiteness was, swarmed at the windows until the real and the imagined became one, a perfect marriage of opposites, like mine has been. Come spring, like yours.
Tap me with your finger, rub me with your sleeve, hold me, sniff me, peel me curling round and round till I burst out white and cold from my tight red coat and tingle in your palm as if I'd melt and breathe a living pomander waiting for the minute of joy when you lift me to your mouth and crush me and in taste and fragrance I race through your head in my dizzy dissolve. I sit in the bowl in my cool corner and watch you as you pass smoothing your apron. Are you thirsty yet? My eyes are shining.
I dreamt. I saw three ladies in a tree, and the one that I saw most clearly showed her favors unto me, and I saw up her leg above the knee! But when the time for love was come, and of readiness I had made myself, upon my head and shoulders dropped the other two like an unquiet dew. What were these two but the one? I saw in their faces, I heard in their words, wonder of wonders! it was the undoing of me they came down to see! Sister, they said to her who upon my lap sat complacent, expectant: he is dead in his head, and we have errands, have errands ... Oh song of wistful night! Light shows where it stops nobody knows, and two are one, and three, to me, and to look is not to read the book. <> <>
<>  Among its starlit pools, When dark the woodland lies asleep,  And dusk its water cools: The fireflies round its bank of ferns  Hang will-o'-wisps for lamps, Where in a place no eye discerns  Enchantment's host encamps. The bats above it go and come  In reeling rigadoons, While Elfland beats a beetle-drum,  Or cricket-fiddle tunes; And in and out, and all about,  The pixy people dance To katydid song and green-frog gong  That hold the woods in trance. The moon looks, listening, through its trees  As if to hear its calls, Or with long arms of light to seize  Its twinkling waterfalls With Witchcraft who, a foam-white hand,  Its glimmering banks between, Beckons from sand to riffled sand,  To something far, unseen. A ghost, that leans beside it still;  The phantom of a boy, Who followed once its wildwood will  With barefoot troops of joy: The soul of him who yearns afar  To see, in dusk and dew, If still it dances with the star  That once his boyhood knew.
SHE BUILT TO THE HEIGHT OF HER BREAST, AN EARTH-WORK OF THISTLES AND SOD. SHE LAVED HER SOFT ARMS IN THE SPRING, SHE SCATTERED THE FIRE WITH A ROD. THE ROSE-PETAL CHILD BY HER SIDE, CRIED OUT WITH A COUNTENANCE WHITE, THE MOUND THEY HAD BUILDED AWOKE, WITH EYES THAT WERE BLINKING AND BRIGHT. THE SEVEN STRANGE DRAGONS OF ART, CAME FORTH LIKE GOLD PARCHMENTS UNROLLED, AND FAWNED ON THE SIBYL'S DOVE-HAND, SUBMISSIVE AS SHEEP FROM THE FOLD. YET SHIMMERING OPALS OF FIRE, YET TITAN CHAMELEON KINGS, ALL HISSING IMPATIENTLY THERE, UNSHEATHING THEIR TUSKS AND THEIR STINGS. SHE LAUGHED WHILE THEY FOAMED O'ER THE FIELD, AND BLASTED THE HEDGES WITH HEAT, AND POUNDED THE BOULDERS TO DUST, AND ATE THE RED FAGOTS LIKE MEAT. GO FORTH, TEAR THIS IRON AGE DOWN, &ldquo;MY SONS,&rdquo; THUS THE WISE WOMAN SPOKE, &ldquo;AND SET EVERY FANTASY FREE, AND EVERY CRUSHED WORKER UNYOKE. ESTABLISH THE SANDALWOOD AGE, ESTABLISH THE WHITE AGE OF ART, WHEN EARTH WILL STILL SIN AS OF OLD, BUT SIN WITH A LOFTIER HEART. WHEN CATIFFS AND BRAGGARTS WILL SLAY, BUT SLAY WITH A LOFTIER LUST. WHEN LAUGHTER'S BRIGHT ROAD WILL BE CLEAN, AND TRAGEDY'S PATH MORE AUGUST. WHEN YOUTH WILL CLIMB RECKLESSLY STILL, BUT CLIMB DRAGON-GREAT IN ITS PRIDE. AND FULL-BLOODED, FURIOUS HOSTS, WILL FLAUNT MY WHITE BANNER AND RIDE TO FIGHT AGAINST BALLOTS WITH TRUTH. 'GAINST MOBS, WITH THE CHISEL AND PEN; THE PRIZE OF MY SOLDIERS TO BE FAIR CONTINENTS FITTED FOR MEN.&rdquo; THE DRAGONS GAVE HEED TO THAT WORD, LIKE FIELD-FLOWERS THEY BOWED TO HER BREATH, WHO MADE THEM AND ORDERED THEM FORTH, WITH POWERS OF CREATION AND DEATH. THE CHILD SMOOTHED THEIR LEONINE MANES. FROM WIZARDRY HID IN THAT HAND, THEY GREW AS THE THUNDER-CLOUDS GROW, ENCOMPASSING WATER AND LAND, AND OH, HOW THEIR SERPENTINE SCALES FLASHED, BATTLED AND CRASHED IN THE AIR! THEY CLIMBED WITH ALL-CONQUERING COILS, GOD'S CRYSTAL, IMPERIAL STAIR. THEY ROARED THROUGH THE PATHWAYS OF DAY, SKY SWEEPING THEIR FOAM-FURROWS FLEW, THE SUN WAS AN ISLAND BESIEGED, THEIR PENNONS TALL WAVES OF THE BLUE. BEHEMOTHS THEY WERE OF THAT TIDE. OVERHEAD THAT MEN CALL THE HIGH NOON, THEIR CRIES IN BLOOD-STIRRING ACCORD, LIKE TRUMPETS OF DOOMSDAY IN TUNE! AND NOW THEY WERE GONE LIKE THE WIND, AND CLOUDLESS AND SILENT THE HOUR, THE SIBYL WENT BACK TO THE TOWN, AND HER SONS HURRIED FORTH IN HER POWER.
Civil Rights included Nathan and the rest of them, who got in america big shotting off the agony a class of blue Bloods, hip to the swing and sway of the usa. yeh all the 1st negroes world wide, joined knees, and shuffled heroically into congress, city hall, the anti-p program, and a thousand penetrable traps of cookstove america. a class of exploiters, in black face, collaborators, not puppets, pulling their own strings, and ours too, in the poor people's buck dance, w/o the bux. But see, then later, you talkin afrika, and its unity like a giant fist of iron, smashing &ldquo;racialism,&rdquo; around the world. But see that fist, any fist, reared back to strike an enemy, shd strike the real enemy. Not a colorless shadow for black militants in residence, to bloat the pockets and consolidate the power of an international bourgeoisie. In rag time, slanting stick legs, with a pocket full of toasted seaweed, and a bibliography of bitter neocapitalists or bohemian greys, celebrating life in a dark garage w/ all cars banned until the voodoo car appear. The way the rich blackies showed after we marched and built their material base, now niggers are left in the middle of the panafrikan highway, babbling about eternal racism, and divine white supremacy a hundred thousand dollar a year oppression and now the intellectualization, the militant resource of the new class, its historical valorization. Between them, john johnson and elijah, david rockefeller rests his smiling head.
I will give you all my keys,  You shall be my ch&acirc;telaine, You shall enter as you please,  As you please shall go again. When I hear you jingling through  All the chambers of my soul, How I sit and laugh at you  In your close housekeeping r&ocirc;le! Jealous of the smallest cover,  Angry at the simplest door; Well, you anxious, inquisitive lover,  Are you pleased with what's in store? You have fingered all my treasures;  Have you not, most curiously, Handled all my tools and measures  And masculine machinery? Over every single beauty  You have had your little rapture; You have slain, as was your duty,  Every sin-mouse you could capture. Still you are not satisfied!  Still you tremble faint reproach! Challenge me I keep aside  Secrets that you may not broach. Maybe yes, and maybe no;  Maybe there  Altars barbarous below,  Elsewhere halls of high disgraces. Maybe yes, and maybe no,  You may have it as you please; Since you are so keen to know  Everything, Miss Ill-at-ease!
Poet-drummer in one skin, brush strokes of his grandmother making tortillas written on this brown face, and his hands move over pages of prayers as he speaks of his daughters. When he snares his life in the poem for his grandmother, his voice fades in the black of his hand poised on the blackboard sill, the trapdrummed knuckles cracking in this schoolroom of maps and charts; he says he was ashamed of her, bandage-stockings, scuffed marks where she shuffled for his breakfast as his thumbs shuttle over a page of poems, her childhood smallpox killing her sisters, the poem drumming its fingers in her oily face, skinned brown flour while the hot grease pocks his skin brown. In the car he says he will write of his daughters, twins from a single embrace, his youngest by marriage; and when he writes of them she will unroll her blanched stockings and unplait her hair where her flour smiles.
Leith dock's lashed spars roped the young heart of Tait. What made gales tighten, not undo, each knot? Nothing's more dazzling than a ravelling plot. Stubby crisscrossing fingers fixed the freight so fast he started sketching on the spot. The mathematics of the twisted state uncoiled its waiting elegances, straight. Old liquid chains that strung the gorgeous tot God spliced the mainbrace with, put on the slate, and sent creation reeling from, clutched hot as caustic on Tait's brain when he strolled late along the links and saw the stars had got such gouts and knots of well-tied fire the mate must sail out whistling to his stormy lot.
This is the last of all, then, this is the last! I must fold my hands, and turn my face to the fire, And watch my dead days fusing together in dross, Shape after shape, and scene after scene of my past Clotting to one dead mass in the sinking fire Where ash on the dying coals grows swiftly, like heavy  moss. Strange he is, my son, for whom I have waited like a lover; Strange to me, like a captive in a foreign country, haunting The confines, gazing out beyond, where the winds go free; White and gaunt, with wistful eyes that hover Always on the distance, as if his soul were chaunting A monotonous weird of departure away from me. Like a thin white bird blown out of the northern seas, Like a bird from the far north blown with a broken wing Into our sooty garden, he drags and beats Along the fence perpetually, seeking release From me, from the hand of my love which creeps up,  needing His happiness, whilst he in displeasure retreats. I must look away from him, for my faded eyes Like a cringing dog at his heels offend him now, Like a toothless hound pursuing him with my will; Till he chafes at my crouching persistence, and a sharp  spark flies In my soul from under the sudden frown of his brow As he blenches and turns away, and my heart stands still. This is the last, it will not be any more. All my life I have borne the burden of myself, All the long years of sitting in my husband's house; Never have I said to myself as he closed the door: &ldquo;Now I am caught! You are hopelessly lost, O Self! You are frightened with joy, my heart, like a frightened  mouse.&rdquo; Three times have I offered myself, three times rejected. It will not be any more. No more, my son, my son!  Never to know the glad freedom of obedience, since long  ago The angel of childhood kissed me and went! I expected This last one to claim me; and now, my son, O my son, I must sit alone and wait, and never know The loss of myself, till death comes, who cannot fail. Death, in whose service is nothing of gladness, takes me; For the lips and the eyes of God are behind a veil. And the thought of the lipless voice of the Father shakes me With dread, and fills my heart with the tears of desire, And my heart rebels with anguish, as night draws nigher.
There is no singing without God. Words sound in the air, mine are flying, their wombs empty. Whining for the living weight, they bear themselves, a din of echoes, and vanish: a subsiding noise, a flatulence, a nothing that stinks. The glory of man shall fly away like a bird  no birth, no pregnancy, no conception. A people dies intestate, its benediction lost. And the future succeeds, unfathered, a mute, responding to no sign, foraging its own fields at night, hiding by day. Withheld in the unuttered blessing, God labors, and is not born. But if I enter, vanished bones of the broken temple, lost people, and go in the sanctum of the scattered house, saying words like these, forgive my profaneness is insufferable to me and bless, make fertile my words, give them a radiant burden! Do not deny your blessing, speak to us.
He thinks he knows a little about love. A river-bank, the branches crowding round, Imprisoning the sun, the yellow leaves Embracing, wilting slightly in the heat; Those stream-smooth pebbles, lying just too deep To reach. The sound of water in the hills, A vacant summer evening closing in, The darkening grass, the branches vanishing. Watching his mirror-image watching him Behind the bar, he almost loves himself. Almost. And yet his mind is following A cloud across a birdless winter sky, Or prints set hard in snow, or passages Through leafless woods. The geometric trees Do not embrace: they touch, scratch and unfold The wounds of winter, the futility Of making contact. Best to stand and drink Secure in some bright apathetic world; To wait, and hope someone will penetrate His abstract code, but still not understand. It is an old accepted paradox, Escape's vague border with reality. He needs a bar, an image and a pose To which the moss of solitude will cling. He turns and says, &lsquo;The counterpoint of Bach Is like that of the Modern Jazz Quartet But not so brittle.&rsquo; Living in an age Of jagged noises and too brittle sounds, We choose either the wilted summer leaf Or else the branches' patterned skeleton. He thinks of blind men, tries to share the lack Of image crushed upon the retina: They have their perfect vision, not the sight Of years or days or placid winter skies; Yet he retains the fading vestiges, The summers and the fallings out of love. He chooses winter, treading where the fox Has trod, where rabbits ran some other day, And where the tracks are frozen hard. He thinks He knows too little and too much of love.
Driven back on the walk by the riptide of cars but soon I'll pick an opening and risk it  bent under the burden of a bag of dirty clothes gasping in this dirty January : the wild moment of the limit of power and patience which we long for in life when we're wasting away is easy to reach when strength and endurance are sapped by despair and no prospect and pain  O wild glad hour that I forecasted under better better better auspices! the blind I am with brimming of self-pity do not contemn, for it is for a man. &ldquo;Lead me across! lead me across, you likely lad, I dimly see the luminous emblem of a breathing Dragon on your gray silken back and in your voice I hear the memory of songs.&rdquo;  I think it is the Messenger of Death and hopefully hold out my breathless arm while the fast wheels spit ice in our faces and steam is pouring from the underground.
The man is not cute. The man is not ugly. The man is teaching himself to read. He sits in a kitchen chair under a banana tree. He holds the newspaper. He tracks each word with a finger and opens his mouth to the sound. Next to the chair the old V-Z rifle leans at the ready. His wife chases a baby pig with a homemade broom and then she chases her daughter running behind the baby pig. His neighbor washes up with water from the barrel after work. The dirt floor of his house has been swept. The dirt around the chair where he sits has been swept. He has swept the dirt twice. The dirt is clean. The dirt is his dirt. The man is not cute. The man is not ugly. The man is teaching himself to read.
No one cared for the iron sparrow That fell from the sky that quiet day With no bird's voice, a mad beast's bellow. Sparrow, your wing was a broken scar As you blundered into the mother-barley. Sparrow, how many men did you bear? &ldquo;Ten good men, pilot and gunner  Trapped in the whirlpool, held by no hands, Twisting from truth with curse and prayer. &ldquo;Ten good men I bore in my belly  Not as the mother-barley bears. Ten good men I returned to her there.&rdquo; <> <> Home again to the barley-mother  Ten good sons, pilot and gunner, Radioman and bombardier.
<> Was his: firm-fisted name, and then,  Great-grandfathers were so, it seems, the hall Is full with oval frames and dust; they look Queer nowadays that face, as if it took A lot of breath to be a good wheelwright, But this he heard stars filter through the brook, While wondering on wood pigeons in the night; He pressed to know and love the eager might Of flowers and worms a poet, if you will, Who lived in beauty's print and beauty's flight, And knew his books quite through; I think that still This uncut page you see ... I've marked the place Holds that strange worry in his picture face.
o by the by has anybody seen little you-i who stood on a green hill and threw his wish at blue with a swoop and a dart out flew his wish (it dived like a fish but it climbed like a dream) throbbing like a heart singing like a flame blue took it my far beyond far and high beyond high bluer took it your but bluest took it our away beyond where what a wonderful thing is the end of a string (murmurs little you-i as the hill becomes nil) and will somebody tell me why people let go
in the spines of the saguaros the wind whines the spines voiceless are sung word makes the saguaros these wreathed brides wax flowers on their heads, their arms virgin voices singing epithalamia dust dances in devils flesh on the skeleton of the wind that scours mountains to bone and sings them I have become part of the landscape that didn't produce me bones scoured an Aeolian harp for the breath of the wind going through my rib cage out of my mouth the words that the wind which is not wind but spirit insists upon the word speaks the word gives life spiny song of spirit saguaro dust mountain rib cage mouth word silent my integuments dissolve bones grinding to dust at the edge of a wash in the season before the rains under a quiet saguaro that wears burst fruit blood-blackened by the moon
Once more I summon you Out of the past With poignant love, You who nourished the poet And the lover. I see your gray eyes Looking out to sea In those Rockport summers, Keeping a distance Within the closeness Which was never intrusive Opening out Into the world. And what I remember Is how we laughed Till we cried Swept into merriment Especially when times were hard. And what I remember Is how you never stopped creating And how people sent me Dresses you had designed With rich embroidery In brilliant colors Because they could not bear To give them away Or cast them aside. I summon you now Not to think of The ceaseless battle With pain and ill health, The frailty and the anguish. No, today I remember The creator, The lion-hearted.
The hills of this tractor land unspeculated moves across itself in savory rolls the way a redwinged blackbird traverses her misty green hills. Satori was never like this. I picture you sweating just beyond the furthest of these California land- clearing mounds of earth, the grass beneath your feet &amp; your mind in the heaven of hikers. Yellow tractors of thoughts are plowing the air around you as you look up to see there's far more sky than land or sea to understand. You're walking by foot; I do it by eye. Slowly you reach the summit out there, precisely at the spot where our seeing each other becomes the only point of arrival. Harvest me the meaning of the way it looks this morning.
I miss you in the dawn, of gradual flowering lights And prayer-pale stars that pass the drowsing-incensed hymns, When early earth through all her greenly-sleeping limbs Puts on the exquisite gold day.The Christlike sun Moves to his resurrection in rejoicing heights, And priestly hills partake of morning one by one. I look for you when comes the beautiful blue moon, When earth is as a queen whose soul hath taken flight, Embalmed in the entire strength of perfect light. The immense heaven, a vase of utter silence, towers Vastward, beyond where dreams the unawakened moon, Holding infinity and her invisible flowers. The hours drum up to sunset; now the west awakes To armies. Suddenly across the firmament Couriers of light spur forth their captain's high intent. Now devout legions, mustering heavenward without cease, Face the hushed hordes of night.A trumpet-radiance breaks  I see the young ranked glories marching down to peace. Twilight, and great with silence of beginning dreams, Yet haunted still by broken hosts in brave retreat, Of blameless cohorts whelmed into sublime defeat, Which, darkly under world their ragged spears withdraw, Shall rise to fire the night in far victorious gleams, When over the towered east leaps the white sword of dawn. So do I want you, when in heavenly spaces God Slips His white wonders on the silent trail of time; When out the smoking eve begins to slowly climb A great, red, fearsome flower, about whose fatal face The faint moths gather and die till withered pale, she nod Far in the west, and morn the little dreams shall chase. Now is the world at peace; Heaven unto her heart Holdeth sublimities afar from touch of day, Presents divine the fates shall never take away, Unfaded memories, immortal ponderings, The little knock of prayer whereby are thrown apart Those inner doors which lead into all priceless things. O night, mother divine of poetry and stars! O thou whose patient face is nearest unto God, Thou of chaste feet with beautiful oblivion shod, Having the dear, swift-winged dark within thy hands,  The prison invisible of souls thy peace unbars, And love and I rise up into unspoken lands.
Two narrow files of houses scowl, Blackened with grime, on either side Of the road, and through them prowl Strange men and women, shifty-eyed And slinking. The drink-shop throws A flaring yellow light adown The pavement. The gutter flows A turbid evil stream. A clown, Drink-sodden, lurches by and sings Obscenely. A woman trails behind, With old bad eyes. Her clothing clings Rain-soaked about her. No daring wind, Light-hearted, from a garden blows The sweetness here of any rose.
The disbeliever walked the moonlit place, Outside of gates of hammered serafin, Observing the moon-blotches on the walls. The yellow rocked across the still fa&ccedil;ades, Or else sat spinning on the pinnacles, While he imagined humming sounds and sleep. The walker in the moonlight walked alone, And each blank window of the building balked His loneliness and what was in his mind: If in a shimmering room the babies came, Drawn close by dreams of fledgling wing, It was because night nursed them in its fold. Night nursed not him in whose dark mind The clambering wings of birds of black revolved, Making harsh torment of the solitude. The walker in the moonlight walked alone, And in his heart his disbelief lay cold. His broad-brimmed hat came close upon his eyes.
Above lone woodland ways that led To dells the stealthy twilights tread The west was hot geranium red;  And still, and still, Along old lanes the locusts sow With clustered pearls the Maytimes blow, Deep in the crimson afterglow, We heard the homeward cattle low, And then, far off, like some far woe,  The whippoorwill, the whippoorwill. Beneath the idle beechen boughs We heard the slow bells of the cows Come softly, jangling towards the house;  And still, and still, Beyond the light that would not die Out of the scarlet-haunted sky, Beyond the evening-star's white eye Of glittering chalcedony, Drained out of dusk the plaintive cry  Of &ldquo;whippoorwill,&rdquo; of &ldquo;whippoorwill.&rdquo; And in the city oft, when swims The pale moon o'er the smoke that dims Its disc, I dream of wildwood limbs,  And still, and still, I seem to hear, where shadows grope 'Midst ferns and flowers that dewdrops rope,  Lost in faint deeps of heliotrope Above the clover-sweetened slope,  Retreat, despairing, past all hope,  The whippoorwill, the whippoorwill.
A cupid with a crooked face Peered into Laura's jewel-case: &lsquo;Emerald, diamond, ruby, moonstone, Jacinth, agate, pearl, cornelian, Red and black garnet, sapphire, beryl, Topaz, amethyst and opal, Pure rock-crystal.&rsquo; &lsquo;These are hers, Cupid, for instruction In love's variety, to have and hold. No common glass intrudes among them And all are set in gold.&rsquo; &lsquo;But if she fails you?&rsquo; asks the mannerless cupid. &lsquo;Will she return them? Will she sell them? Will they be mine when sold?&rsquo; Dear God, how stupid can a cupid be, Asking such mercenary questions of me?
Submit, fight, run: young woman demented in childbirth, a boy four dead: Turner 'live and dead; Crandall's burned school checkers our stacked churches, Lovejoy murdered, Fayette's stories of woe: I swear a blood-feud with slavery, my sword of Gideon amidst this vast veil: &ldquo;it is right for slaves to kill their masters and escape.&rdquo; Plans form their towpaths to arsenal gates, Gabriel's glory, openended.
Seeing how I love you utterly, And your disdain is my despair, Alter this dulcet eye, forbear To wear those looks that latterly You wore, and won me wholly, wear A brow more dark, and bitterly Berate my dulness and my care, Seeing how your smile is my despair, Seeing how I love you utterly. Seeing how I love you utterly, And your distress is my despair, Alter this brimming eye, nor wear The trembling lip that latterly Under a more auspicious air You wore, and thrust me through, forbear To drop your head so bitterly Into your hands, seeing how I dare No tender touch upon your hair, Knowing as I do how fitterly You do reproach me than forbear, Seeing how your tears are my despair, Seeing how I love you utterly.
BallHis whole world revolves around light dark Birdthings sailing thru the air around chairs Dogthe mystery of rising &amp; falling &amp; getting Cheeseup again in the morning at night/scratching Shoesat windows to get out bananas oranges a Catstep/stepping down stepping up/keep the music Juicegoing/IV theme songs/walks on stories, dancing Babyon manhole covers, anything circular, objects Daddythat hang &amp; flap in the breeze/the wind as Mamait foams into a room making the skin cool Boatpuffing out curtains/baths/water/legs/kiss MamaHere we go into the rain turning sunlight Here we go down the slide into sandpiles MommyHere we go clapping our hands as blocks fall Here we go running from Mama Mommy Mimi baby Nocrashing into Daddy dozing on the floor, a world is shooting our of rubber tree leaves NoseThe window is a magic mirror/sad to see time flowing throwing itself thru flesh electric Hotthat hard months ago was only a flash in a sea of possibility/the suffering afloat CarThe meanness he will have to endure is only life ungathered in the eye of no world/is light Bookpure &amp; not so simple after all is living life alive alive O!
Finite, exact, the square Frames the long curve Of hills and perpendicular Spray of the delicate tree. Wires, slanting, swerve Off the flat scene; And shining through The mathematical window The burning sky and the blue sun Create a flowing fourth dimension: The square explodes in space. Then through the abstract window Darkness comes down so deep The exact mountains show Sleep in a flowing line, Earth in a flowing sleep. But suddenly alive The rivers of the air Invade the static square; As the stars only move Obedient to Love, Heart opens into time. The square explodes in space, The window opens into time  As poems breathe within their strict design, As holiness may look out from a face.
Over Manhattan Bridge, I land in the breast of Brooklyn, in the thoroughfares that slap the earth like fresh switches in the playful hands of children. Once in Brooklyn I walked with Charles, my gossip partner, through the West Indian festival, commenting on the floats, watching Spike Lee sign autographs. We saw Brooklyn raw, stepping out of its clothes, walking toward some conjugal laughter, its various parts rolling, shaking in this marvelous vanity parading. And for my thirty-ninth birthday, I saw a South African musical at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, whose acronym knocks you out. The colors were sensational. My wife laughed, Robert napped, my musical gift beat itself into the frenzy of townships and laws that make cities the shy strangers to their own history, make them unsure of themselves with identity crises that set generations into the bumbling unraveling of substantiating a culture's place in the wavering world, on the moody map. In my father's sister's home on the other side of Prospect Park, I listened to tongues that flow like bourbon, tongues that were born in the flat perspective of Virginia. There the trees rise like those in a child's drawing, the scrawling crayon signifying the need to move up North, to migrate, to go until something inward sets your heart to ringing out a shout. In my aunt's home on Maple Street, I heard the sputter of black souls that found Brooklyn when the Tenderloin fell into the conquering coffers of greed. In Brooklyn I saw bare feet circling in the sand and heard voices singing
Does it stay in one place, does it move, does it radiate? Please try to be exact: is it dull, is it sharp, is it a steady ache? Does it throb, itch, gnaw, pulse, prick, draw, stab, pierce, pinch, press, claw, burn? It may well be exquisite, as the dictionary notes, adj., keen, intense, acute, as exquisite pain or pleasure, and of a disease, genuine.
Okay: my daddy wasn't what you'd call a model parent. He was stingy, and his life sometimes gave his jokes a nasty edge that didn't fit the punch line, like the time he and a Puerto Rican neighbor gave me a cup of dark liquid, named it Kool-Aid just to watch an innocent tongue spit wine. This afternoon, as my father lies unhealed in the hospital, my sister pulls up the story of the winter she had to shame him into buying me a coat by going downtown to Woolworth's and lifting one off the rack. It had become clear to her that he wasn't about to do anything, and she got sick of watching my back slump in the wind. Now she adds a piece of the story she's carried for years: how can she tell her brother how a father decides that a child isn't a part of his property? We both know he's wrong, my mother backs us up, and he'll claim the same later with my retarded brother, but it sets a soul to wandering. Months after my father's death, I have a dream. My wife and I check into what should be a &ldquo;good&rdquo; hotel, except nobody's bothered to straighten up our room. The sheets are soiled and jumbled, the kitchen alive with debris. As I call the desk to complain, I feel my stomach sink the way it does before one's about to talk to a mechanic.  <> What did they read on my face that told them  <>
&lsquo;Are you awake, Gemelli,  This frosty night?&rsquo; &lsquo;We'll be awake till reveill&eacute;, Which is Sunrise,&rsquo; say the Gemelli, &lsquo;It's no good trying to go to sleep: If there's wine to be got we'll drink it deep,  But sleep is gone for to-night,  But sleep is gone for to-night.&rsquo; &lsquo;Are you cold too, poor Pleiads,  This frosty night?&rsquo; &lsquo;Yes, and so are the Hyads: See us cuddle and hug,&rsquo; say the Pleiads, &lsquo;All six in a ring: it keeps us warm: We huddle together like birds in a storm:  It's bitter weather to-night,  It's bitter weather to-night.&rsquo; &lsquo;What do you hunt, Orion,  This starry night?&rsquo; &lsquo;The Ram, the Bull and the Lion, And the Great Bear,&rsquo; says Orion, &lsquo;With my starry quiver and beautiful belt I am trying to find a good thick pelt  To warm my shoulders to-night,  To warm my shoulders to-night.&rsquo; &lsquo;Did you hear that, Great She-bear,  This frosty night?&rsquo; &lsquo;Yes, he's talking of stripping  Of my own big fur,&rsquo; says the She-bear, &lsquo;I'm afraid of the man and his terrible arrow: The thought of it chills my bones to the marrow,  And the frost so cruel to-night!  And the frost so cruel to-night!&rsquo; &lsquo;How is your trade, Aquarius,  This frosty night?&rsquo; &lsquo;Complaints is many and various And my feet are cold,&rsquo; says Aquarius, &lsquo;There's Venus objects to Dolphin-scales, And Mars to Crab-spawn found in my pails,  And the pump has frozen to-night,  And the pump has frozen to-night.&rsquo;
<> I chanced to look up at the sky, And saw that it was full of stars! So starry-sown! A man could not. With any care, have stuck a pin Through any single vacant spot. And some were shining furiously; And some were big and some were small; But all were beautiful to see. Blue stars and gold! A sky of grey! The air between a velvet pall! I could not take my eyes away! And there I sang this little psalm Most awkwardly! Because I was Standing between a car and tram!
She is Jonah, she is the whale, swelling, swelling, she has become this terrible recurring image from her nightmares, bloating, cramping, shut inside this bloody cave of herself, these walls that stretch to bear her screams, these walls that collapse around her cutting off her breath  she is trapped in these bloody waters, curse God who will not let her escape across the Red Sea, her calls for help are drowning, plagues pile upon her, spotted tongues of adders, spotted lungs, stained dress holey stockings falling off, the toilet stall swung open, bloodshot eyes staring at her, filth, rages, hustles all shut inside with her, a foetid crowd, so many she has to burst wide open but she's too weak, too faint, weaker, her voice a snail's spittle, a tiny red thread of excrement trailing, she pulls it through her teeth, winding among the strangled, the silent, the endless dark flow of these crowds with nowhere to go, homeless after the fire, the burglary, the looting, the broken windows, smoking cars and crumpled bridges, the tornado, the earthquake, shipwreck, volcano erupting, island sinking, disasters still piling up, she slips among them and follows herself out.
<> how long must we listen here, how long before we go? The dust is deep on the lintels. The dust is dark on the doors. If the dreams shake our bones, what can we say or do? Since early morning we waited. Since early, early morning, child. There must be dreams on the way now. There must be a song for our bones. The dust gets deeper and darker. Do the doors and lintels shudder? How long must we listen here? How long before we go?
You called me a name on such and such a day  Do you remember? you were speaking of Bleistein our brother, The barbarian with the black cigar, and the pockets Ringing with cash, and the eyes seeking Jerusalem, Knowing they have been tricked. Come, brother Thomas, We three must weep together for our exile. I see the hunted look, the protestation, The desperate seeking, the reticence and the brashness Of the giver of laws to the worshippers of calves. At times you speak as if the words were walls, But your walls fell with mine to the torch of a Titus. Come, let us weep together for our exile. We two, no doubt, could accommodate ourselves: We've both read Dante and we both dislike Chicago, And both, you see, can be brutal but you must bow down To our brother Bleistein here, with the unaesthetic Cigar and the somber look. Come, do so quickly, For we must weep together for our exile. O you may enwomb yourself in words or the Word (The Word is a good refuge for people too proud To swallow the milk of the mild Jesus' teaching), Or a garden in Hampshire with a magic bird, or an old Quotation from the Reverend Andrewes, yet someone or something (Let us pause to weep together for our exile) Will stick a needle in your balloon, Thomas. Is it the shape that you saw upon the stair? The four knights clanking toward the altar? the hidden Card in the deck? the sinister man from Nippon? The hordes on the eastern horizon? Come, brother Burbank, And let us weep together for our exile. In the time of sweet sighing you wept bitterly, And now in the time of weeping you cannot weep. Will you wait for the peace of the sailor with pearly bones? Where is the refuge you thought you would find on the island Where each man lives in his castle? O brother Thomas, Come let us weep together for our exile. You drew us first by your scorn, first by your wit; Later for your own eloquent suffering. We loved you first for the wicked things you wrote Of those you acknowledged infinitely gentle. Wit is the sin that you must expiate. Bow down to them, and let us weep for our exile. I see your words wrung out in pain, but never The true compassion for creatures with you, that Dante Knew in his nine hells. O eagle! master! The eagle's ways of pride and scorn will not save Though the voice cries loud in humility. Thomas, Thomas, Come, let us pray together for our exile. You, hypocrite lecteur! mon semblable! mon fr&egrave;re!
Phidias stared, and stood appalled as the Emperor defaced his stone commemoration of the victories in Thrace. &ldquo;I want your stone to promise love on a couch of feathered wings.&rdquo; The sculptor gazed upon the wreck: Body, undefiled by those impurities of hand or face which might deter a victor's lust for chiselled stone to yield to his imperious embrace. Phidias' foot scuffed in the dust, stubbed her marble eye; he watched her raised to a gilded throne. On the plains beneath the Parthenon in ceremonious single file the gala soldiery deployed: Each man knelt down, removed his skull, and placed it on the hallowed pile. Then out of the Temple, into the air, creasing the vacant sky the Goddess of Victory circled them. Her wings and beak like bronze sheaves clanked and her talons held Phidias' heart. May human hatred unto those Who take the armless bitch to bed, Who suckle at her stony dugs And slake their ravening tongues in blood, Invoke such violence on their heads That in that instantaneous change From animal flesh to maggot-food Their brains may momentarily seethe With knowledge of evil, knowledge of good, Their souls with all their lusting did To mankind's possible miracle.
the whole earth together dirt controls clouds holding up air water flows a surface bent in as made the moonrocky cast at length salt washed down what to think or not to think buttons flying the folks back like your own neck as cold as past that wall to smash the head onout on the tree for you years turn stone it's geology Death should be as fast 2 words bullets flash askant your miles
A bare tree holds the fog in place. It seeps out of irregularities In gnarled twigs, those crevices A nuthatch has picked clean  One time there was a hill Behind this tree Dropped down, A prospect of the tumbling Breakers curled. Fog has grown out of a tree. I am the only Thing moving In this country. No sky Over no hill Above no curved horizon, The world contracts, Interchange of codicils Between one stem of taut limbs In the damp halflight Of this birdless day And another.
The dead in via in vita nuova in the way You shall lament who know they are as tender as the horse is. You, do not you speak who know not. &ldquo;I will die about April 1st ...&rdquo; going off &ldquo;I weigh, I think, 80 lbs ...&rdquo; scratch &ldquo;My name is NO RACE&rdquo; address Buchenwald new Altamira cave With a nail they drew the object of the hunt. Put war away with time, come into space. It was May, precise date, 1940. I had air my lungs could breathe. He talked, via stones a stick sea rock a hand of earth. It is now, precise, repeat. I talk of Bigmans organs he, look, the lines! are polytopes. And among the DPs deathhead at the apex of the pyramid. Birth in the house is the One of Sticks, cunnus in the crotch. Draw it thus: () 1910 ( It is not obscure. We are the new born, and there are no flowers. Document means there are no flowers and no parenthesis. It is the radical, the root, he and I, two bodies We put our hands to these dead. The closed parenthesis reads: the dead bury the dead,  and it is not very interesting. Open, the figure stands at the door, horror his and gone, possessed, o new Osiris, Odysseus ship. He put the body there as well as they did whom he killed. Mark that arm. It is no longer gun. We are born not of the buried but these unburied dead crossed stick, wire-led, Blake Underground The Babe the Howling Babe
AND his dark secret love O rose, thou ART sick! Has found out thy BED Of CRIMSON joy. And his DARK secret love Does thy life DESTROY. DOES thy life destroy. That FLIES in the night Has FOUND out thy bed HAS found out thy bed And HIS dark secret love In the HOWLING storm That flies IN the night IN the howling storm The INVISIBLE worm Of crimson JOY. Does thy LIFE destroy. And his dark secret LOVE That flies in the NIGHT O rose, thou art sick! OF crimson joy Has found OUT thy bed O ROSE, thou art sick! And his dark SECRET love O rose, thou art SICK! In the howling STORM THAT flies in the night THE invisible worm That flies in THE night In THE howling storm O rose, THOU art sick! Has found out THY bed Does THY life destroy. The invisible WORM
Cover that infant's mouth and eyes, Said Adam, softly where it lies: The soul that lurks, the soul that flies, Will enter where it clucks and cries. Hold close, said Adam, in the leaves, That struggling girl who first conceives. The souls are fluttering at the eaves: They enter flesh when flesh believes. The invisible souls, now Eden's lost, Hunt, he said, the chosen host To house them, body sick with ghost. I fear the souls, said Adam, most. Adam, Adam, there are none Enter flesh but flesh and bone. Flesh and bone have wonder done And wonder, bone and flesh are One.
The minor diplomat who brings terms for a ceasefire Enters through a side-door, in the small hours, Wearing a belted raincoat. The children have become bold. At the first siren They cried, and ran for their mothers. Now they are worldly-wise, They clamour to watch dogfights above the house, They prefer under-the-kitchen-table to the shelter, They play fighting games Of reading the paper by bomblight, Pretending to be the enemy. These children Are no longer safe. They have learned rash and contrary for ever. Come soon, O minor diplomat in the belted raincoat, come To capitulate. For the children have ack-ack nerves, And a landmine has fallen next door. Under the reservoir, under the wind-figured water, Are the walls, the church, the houses, The small human things, That in drought rise up gaunt and dripping, And it was once Mardale, both is and is not Mardale, But is still there, Like the diplomat, and the crazy fearless children Who progress through their proper stages, and the churchbells With their nightly riddles, And the diplomat, and the children still running Away from shelter, into the path of the bomb.
These were not guilty. Care was blind care without puff-drift from a gouged acre or ozone burnt back through stratosphere  neither x-ray nor photograph nor decodable fantasy nor sheer index of the fleetingness we bear, but a common trace on the high wall of passage, milk and rock powder's full shimmering caravan in profile, as surf ripples along the dune's break to a bound wave pulsing from each stroke of the inner fountain, man awake  bull's hump, elephant's radar-web ear, delicate furred dong of jackal, hair hive on the bride backlit by dawn's roar: for when ice rolled back and sun strengthened over the great middle garden, wind herded our tribe chanting, drove with sand through jonquil and blood ochres crushed in shoulder blades, and led across the green- abandoned advancing wash of stone.
On the edge of the light from the tea-bar Where lorries bound westwards pull in, With the hood of his anorak up In the darkening drizzle, He waits for the river to fill. His friends are on fire with Samurai scotch, Their window-cleaning ventures failed Like stolen paint and threats and promises. But he was always patient as the dead. You could restock the Army and Navy With wellingtons found in the reedbeds And sell back Ninewells its syringes. The water, he sees, is a warehouse. And then there's the human dimension, The surplus the tide has to try and unload, Who must still, in this unmythological age, Come ashore and pay money to do it.
<> And dropt an old man done with by the way, To sit alone among the bats and stare At miles and miles and miles of moorland bare Lit only with last shreds of dying day. Not all the world, not all the world's gone by: Old man, you're like to meet one traveller still, A journeyman well kenned for courtesy To all that walk at odds with life and limb; If this be he now riding up the hill Maybe he'll stop and take you up with him. ... &lsquo;But thou art Death?&rsquo; &lsquo;Of Heavenly Seraphim None else to seek thee out and bid thee come.&rsquo; &lsquo;I only care that thou art come from Him, Unbody me I'm tired and get me home.&rsquo;
The North Sea oil-strike tilts east Scotland up, and the great sick Clyde shivers in its bed. But elegists can't hang themselves on fled- from trees or poison a recycled cup  If only a less faint, shaky sunup glimmered through the skeletal shop and shed and men washed round the piers like gold and spread golder in soul than Mitsubishi or Krupp  The images are ageless but the thing is now. Without my images the men ration their cigarettes, their children cling to broken toys, their women wonder when the doors will bang on laughter and a wing over the firth be simply joy again.
<> They knew no Spanish At first, and nothing of the arts of war At first, how to shoot, how to attack, how to retreat How to kill, how to meet killing At first. Say they kept the air blue Grousing and griping, Arid words and harsh faces. Say They were young; The haggard in a trench, the dead on the olive slope All young. And the thin, the ill and the shattered, Sightless, in hospitals, all young. Say of them they were young, there was much they did not know, They were human. Say it all; it is true. Now say When the eminent, the great, the easy, the old, And the men on the make Were busy bickering and selling, Betraying, conniving, transacting, splitting hairs, Writing bad articles, signing bad papers, Passing bad bills, Bribing, blackmailing, Whimpering, meaching, garroting, they Knew and acted understood and died. Or if they did not die came home to peace That is not peace. Say of them They are no longer young, they never learned The arts, the stealth of peace, this peace, the tricks of fear; And what they knew, they know. And what they dared, they dare.
<> To lift the smiling shell of my disguise. Even should I consent your questing eyes Would come no nearer than another mask. Aye, if for love of you, I should permit Your hands to strip me, husk on husk, away, Until at last, triumphant, you might say, &ldquo;This  And saying, shudder, wince and turn aside From the pale, cringing mockery I call Myself a thing to pity or deride  Still would remain the last disguise of all: The mask  Only a black abysm of nothingness.
&lsquo;And leave him simply the great true recorder&rsquo;, not seeking order, or the measured disorder of chaos theory, but pressing every border, scouring, tracing, probing and extending whatever tries to tell him it's an ending, breaking whatever tells him it's unbending. Leave him to count the bodies in the city. His clothes hang dusty and his hands are gritty. Leave him to fumble to a well, for pity it seems only the water-drops can proffer when human gun, torch, mine, shell, hatred offer nothing but clapped-out coffin, cleared-out coffer. Leave him to walk the roads of wars, grudging no bloodied yard as he pants forward, trudging with refugees in the high passes. Judging but silent, he takes paper, writes. Booty litters forgotten paths, dogs sniff. His duty struggles to keep at least an iron beauty. Words, bitter as tears, are overflowing. Words better than tears are doggedly hoeing fields that seem past harvesting or sowing. What poor great creature then? He limps, he prowls, winces when something deep inside him howls. His line reminds, entices, soars, grieves, growls.
i like to think that on the flower you gave me when we loved the far- departed mouth sweetly-saluted lingers. if one marvel seeing the hunger of my lips for a dead thing, i shall instruct him silently with becoming steps to seek your faceand i entreat, by certain foolish perfect hours dead too, if that he come receive him as your lover sumptuously being kind because i trust him to your grace, and for in his own land he is called death.
Looking back 25 years I imagine it simple (the reality being so uselessly complex), how we made a pier, a jetty of lights, a brightness in that fantastic dark, down which we took our way to the vessel that lay in the shadows. We stood a moment, looking here or there, and then you stepped aboard as if this were perfectly natural, and I turned back into the knowledge of going crazy from loneliness. The lights went out, the pier vanished, the vessel became a kind of legend of a ship beating Oriental seas. Looking back I imagine how I retired to a room I built, perhaps a kiva lit by reflections of the moon, where I celebrated over and over the trembling mysteries of loss. I became a living brain in an effigy of reeds and cloth and paint, completely insane.
A God supreme and immanent Flickers feebly among the leaves. A God whom we cannot blame Because he left it all to us. A God whom we cannot praise Since he left it to us to do. A God who spoke through his vicars Whose vicars speak of other things. A God who appointed our rulers The rulers who disappoint us. A God whom we cannot fear Now hell has been annulled. A God whom we cannot love Since heaven has been shut down. A God whose name was not taken in vain A God whose name is not taken. A God who was a jealous God Sees nothing to be jealous of. A God who gave us life Who now only buries us.
They seemed to all take off at once: Aunt Grace whose kidneys closed shop; Cousin Rose who fed sugar to diabetes; my grandmother's friend who postponed going so long we thought she'd stay. It was like the summer years ago when they all set out on trains and ships, wearing hats with veils and the proper gloves, because everybody was going someplace that year, and they didn't want to be left behind.
At the extreme tip of the future is death, of course, and short of that something not much like life, a careless caring and pain perhaps one's ceasing ceases: an experience whose experience shuts experience down: at the moment one has the whole world's way to say one is beyond words, just words, just beyond words.
I had seen the road before when it was green, and it was green now, still bending through the crooked forest. The crooked forest began upon a hill, I had traveled the road before, but I had forgotten what was at its end, and what the crooked forest held in store for me. I had given a butterfly to the little girl as a pet, when I revisited her I spilled water upon the butterfly, it survived the spill. I was troubled by my spilling despite the survival. I talked to the green woman beside me, I didn't seem able to complete much, but continued talking, murmuring about emerald, acceptance, that for reasons both public and personal I had closed my shop.
There is no tree like Janet;  though swaying in the breeze no tree has boughs like her arms  when she raises them to wave. Her slender hands are paler  than candle-flames at sunrise; no fluttering moths at summer dusk  so swift as her grey eyes. There will be trees as graceful  and gentle, grey-eyed flowers; in shady woods and hedgerows  swift dove-like moths will hover, when with sad voices hurrying winds  usher her spirit to far seas.
The Buddha sat on a banana crate Sunning his mind in the shade, Trying to imagine Aggressive, Trying to imagine Afraid. A man staggered up to the Buddha, He was horrified and thin. He was hacking with a knife at his body, Paring his own skin. The Buddha said: &lsquo;Be kind to yourself.&rsquo; The thin man lowered his knife; Then he said, as his blood ran into the earth: 'Where've you been all your life? 'You know, you can't change human nature just like that. I once saw it proved in a book by a scientist's rat. We're jellies shaking with atavistic greed. You can't change human nature you may as well bleed.'
It was shipwreck, after all. The sides burst in, and the masts Broke, and one huge white sail Flowed beautiful over the sea, Till the suck drew it under. He saw then at last that he Had not for himself alone Made punishment. As they split, He thought, &lsquo;Oh God, how man Makes his own thunder&rsquo;. He had known all along that this Would happen. And great remorse Filled him as he saw his men Swimming to the dreadful mouths Of the sharks for plunder.
I overheard the other night standing by the window of the big house a nigra say, through an alabaster mask, &ldquo;the first negro was a white man.&rdquo; Slanty red darts angulate the darkness my hands got cold, my head was sweaty like a mystery story like a gospel hymn like the tales of the wizards and the life of the gods I did not know who my father was I only barely knew my mother But I knew something that night about a negro something even the tv cant wash away I fount out something about the negro the wind may blow the train dont come the mayor might belch his mistress might gain weight But I fount out something that night about the negro &amp; the world got clear you can hurray all you want to you can kiss an elephant's ass But I fount something that night, before I slid back to the field hands' quarters I fount out something about the magic of slavery &amp; I vowed not to be a slave no more.
The sunlight was not our concern or even The pane it shone through, and no one was going Down for the mail, and the four lettuces The gardener brought as a gift seemed to be A calculated bounty, so that early on We knew we were going to be stuck with ourselves The rest of the day, the vicissitudes Marching in rows from the forest, the balms Not arriving till nightfall. On the prowl Since morning, the wind had a touch too much Of motivation, an annoying way Of exactly ruffling the same oak leaf As if it were practicing a piano trill; All day, repetitive birds, far off, Were either boring themselves to death Or, drunk on instinct, doing their thing: Ritual dances, territorial rites  The whole imperial egg. What nests Ambition is weaving in us is hard To say: after the flat occasion, The unshared sphere, each childish wish Grows hopeless finding this is what the world is. For this, the recommended cures are useless: A cheery hello to the disaffected At breakfast? A soupful of tears at dinner? You could spill the whole silly story out To one more demanding, ill-tempered beauty You happened to meet at the A. &amp; P., And still every greedy shopping cart, First overstuffed and then abandoned In the parking lot, would leave in its wake Some human need, ignored, half-starved... Torn between having nothing to say And saying it, whole diaries get down: <> <> And so on. And always the hoped-for redeemer Turns up and turns with a country stare: The girl in the lime linen shorts, the boy With blond corn-silk tow hair, the heart Speeding up until they speak: the dross Of cars, the sportsman's life, and money; And so, believing that you had come To rest among the innocent soldiers Of sleep, you had merely stumbled on Another temporary battlefield As never-lasting as the shine of water.
No one alive has seen such ice but the five-mile floor of water so clenched itself salt broke down. Among us even the age-wearied would not dream you might walk the Chesapeake Bay and look unafraid on its lucid darkness, and the fathers of fathers, boatwrights, sailors of all waters, never guessed this stuttering toy might take them so far. But someone, joking maybe, has rolled a small house on perilous wheels down the banks of the James, gunned it forward for skids, runs, circles, a day of such joyous noise the dead seemed to have risen, so many great-booted and black-coated are out there. We cannot tell what they think, or if they find themselves dancing on the road where no road ever was, though there are long skirts, a few thick-waisted grandmothers, even a scatter of children cast about. All of them are facing Norfolk, where ships doze like unimaginable beasts the sea has given to the dreams of men. The Model T is small, black, plain, and appears cornered like something risen through ice. Hands reach in the hazed air but do not touch what must be chugging in a kind of terror. The plate is dotted far and near. Seagulls? Stains? Some mistake of glass? And do these faces only look averted, cast down? Among these is the one who will breed us, having crossed a whiteness he will not speak about even to her whose skirts he will shake us from. But now gears spin inside him, wheels, a future of machines. One day he will tell my father he walked on water ... sick, chugging for breath, shunned as crazy, who I remember by the habitual odor of gasoline. When he died my father said he was too frightened to live. Under the ice where they walk the dark is enormous. All day I watch the backs turned away for the one face that is mine, that is going to wheel at me the secrets of many.
<> I never hear the west wind but tears are in my eyes. For it comes from the west lands, the old brown hills, And April's in the west wind, and daffodils. It's a fine land, the west land, for hearts as tired as mine, Apple orchards blossom there, and the air's like wine. There is cool green grass there, where men may lie at rest, And the thrushes are in song there, fluting from the nest. &ldquo;Will you not come home, brother? you have been long away, It's April, and blossom time, and white is the may; And bright is the sun, brother, and warm is the rain,  Will you not come home, brother, home to us again? &ldquo;The young corn is green, brother, where the rabbits run, It 's blue sky, and white clouds, and warm rain and sun. It 's song to a man's soul, brother, fire to a man's brain, To hear the wild bees and see the merry spring again. &ldquo;Larks are singing in the west, brother, above the green wheat, So will you not come home, brother, and rest your tired feet? I've a balm for bruised hearts, brother, sleep for aching eyes,&rdquo; Says the warm wind, the west wind, full of birds' cries.
I long, oh, long to lie 'Neath beechen branches, twisted, Green 'twixt the summer sky; The woodland shadows nigh Like dryads sunbeam-wristed: The livelong day to dream Beside a wildwood stream. I long, oh, long to hear The claustral forest breathing, Sound soothing to the ear; To see the wild-vine near Its scarlet blooms unsheathing: The livelong day to cross Slow o'er the nut-strewn moss. I long, oh, long to see The nesting red-bird singing Glad on the wood-rose tree: To watch the breezy bee, Half in the wildflower, swinging: God's livelong day to pass Deep in cool forest grass. Oh, soul, so builded in With mart and booth and steeple, Brick alley-ways of sin, What hope for you to win Ways free of pelf and people! Ways of the leaf and root And soft Mygdonian flute!
Sometimes I breathe and the time called Now intrudes. Marching down some street, people hand me a flag and watch how hard I wave it. Don't they know that in the sky someone keeps track of the world? Someone like Mohammed? Someone like Jesus? My friends outline my weakness inattention, a selfish life, dull reactions. My mouth says, &ldquo;Oh.&rdquo; My hands wander over my vest or vaguely follow an invisible butterfly before me. My face makes adjustments, but none decisive, the mouth not quite smiling, the eyes turning aside. Have you noticed? I notice that people observe how stupid I am, how obsolete my views and practices, and my whole generation, how we enjoy superficial styles, arts, manners. I listen to these discoveries. I read about my weakness. How could I have missed the obvious truth so long? Generously, my critics lift examples: &ldquo;There!&rdquo; &ldquo;And look at this.&rdquo; I see it; they have a point. But it's hard to give up what used to please me. Maybe in time I can. Sometimes I breathe and the stars go by in their serene beatitudes, never disturbing a weather-gray house by the sea where I have hidden my life. My gypsy attention continues its years-long wandering. It will return. It will find my mouth saying, &ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; as the ocean rises and falls, responding to those deliberate events in the sky  the sun, the moon, the stars.
Four wet winters and now the dry. All the long season a sterile frost Grips the mountain, the coast like flanged metal Bent thwart the sea. Above: Stripped trees, taut-twisted branches Catch stark white light. Below: Shriveled creekbeds, raw to the air, run naked roots, Obscenely groined through flaking rock, The scat of torrents. Then early last evening A thin drizzle, gaining toward dusk. Before dark dropped The low-hanging cloud slit its belly and the rain plunged. All night long the thirsty slopes drank straight-falling water, Soaking it up, filling those tilted, deep-shelving seams, Blue veins of the mountain, zig-zag crevices of fractured shale. When dawn flared and the rain held The runoff began. We rise with the light Sally down to the stream to touch fresh water For a kind of blessing. We find instead a river of ink. All the hoard of tributary creeks, those catchers of leaf-drift  The strip of alder and the slough of fir, Acrid shuff of the leathery tan-oak; and laurel, The redolent, littering leaves of the laurel  All that autumn-spun opulence Frost drove down and ruthlessly squandered Four moons back, to rot where it fell, Now crawls to the sea, a liquid bile. You look up at last in a wondering way And exclaim softly, &ldquo;Why, the mountain is menstruating!&rdquo; Something in your voice, a tremor there, Tells of the natural womanly pulse, the deep sensing, Its sympathetic pang, its soft vibration. Looking, I see indeed it is true: Leaves like dead cells Long held back in the frigid womb Begin now to flow under the rain A deep cleansing, this rite of renewal. For me it is runoff but my heart purges. Touching you and creek-throb in the same impulse I am healed of frost: Woman and water in the blood-flow.
The cloud-backed heron will not move: He stares into the stream. He stands unfaltering while the gulls And oyster-catchers scream. He does not hear, he cannot see The great white horses of the sea, But fixes eyes on stillness Below their flying team. How long will he remain, how long Have the grey woods been green? The sky and the reflected sky, Their glass he has not seen, But silent as a speck of sand Interpreting the sea and land, His fall pulls down the fabric Of all that windy scene. Sailing with clouds and woods behind, Pausing in leisured flight, He stepped, alighting on a stone, Dropped from the stars of night. He stood there unconcerned with day, Deaf to the tumult of the bay, Watching a stone in water, A fish's hidden light. Sharp rocks drive back the breaking waves, Confusing sea with air. Bundles of spray blown mountain-high Have left the shingle bare. A shipwrecked anchor wedged by rocks, Loosed by the thundering equinox, Divides the herded waters, The stallion and his mare. Yet no distraction breaks the watch Of that time-killing bird. He stands unmoving on the stone; Since dawn he has not stirred. Calamity about him cries, But he has fixed his golden eyes On water's crooked tablet, On light's reflected word.
In San Francisco, spring was not a season but an interim with rain and a gentle switch in the wind from the sea. The bay on one side, the clean city on the other, we moved in the clutch of friends down the steep steps  as I pictured you standing half in, half out of water, you glossed the houses, history fixed in each fa&ccedil;ade, and we received a d&eacute;coupage of gardens, trees of fuchsia, the queen's erotic earrings, and gardenias, again in trees, the aisle among them redolent and bruised. Does it wear well, that civil promise camouflaging rock? The sea gives, the sea takes back, the waves lick the women's bodies on the beach. What is  rising out of winter's vast denial, this other flowering: a deep release such as overtakes the cloistered animals as the last snow shreds in the dilating pupil of the lake, and birds return to the dull sky their nearly legible music.
You in a tallness slenderly, as a lone white birch I knew once swaying in a small wind, walk away from our bed to the window, and in the light from the old streetlamp I am shown the glisten of the line of the curve of the fall from shoulder to flank, breast to knee, in shadow the gleam of the inner edges of your long legs so that a wilderness in me, rising, begs silently, and you turn, a calculus of bright changes, glyphs in the dimness, and you walk silently back, delicately, as the egrets stalk. Truly, all things most good happen at night. We know. Later with our last energy we talk and fall asleep, embers of abeyant light.
It's anarchy out there: nicotiana Stoned out of their flowery heads; Ivy-leaved pelargoniums Gone woodily assertive; and beans, Up the wall, over the roof ... It's hard to keep up: I rescue fronds Of lolling Chilean glory vine (And end of course by snapping them); Winged purple bells downturned, Fuchsias in suspended mid-dive ... And then the welcome invaders: Poppies, toadflax, yellow vetch, Lobelia all self-seeded hangers-on ... A boudoir for bees, an aphids' banquet: What god of paradox has made this place?
phone pole whistle lengths track always as far you can tell crossings shadows roofs bush trees
I stood upon a height and listened to  The solemn psalmody of many pines,  And with the sound I seemed to see long lines Of mountains rise, blue peak on cloudy blue, And hear the roar of torrents hurling through  Riven ravines; or from the crags' gaunt spines  Pouring wild hair, where, as an eyeball shines,  A mountain pool shone, clear and cold of hue. And then my soul remembered felt, how once,  In ages past, 't was here that I, a Faun,  Startled an Oread at her morning bath, Who stood revealed; her beauty, like the sun's,  Veiled in her hair, heavy with dews of dawn,  Through which, like stars, burnt blue her eyes' bright wrath.
WHEN I SIT WITH YOU across the table Lorca's eyes rise up between us &amp; they stare they are two flageolets 2 castanets cassettes of little pleasuresset into a glass wall broken into pieces otherwisehow stare how spare a glance for where a star swims by how glare at Lorca glaring past you like a glass on firea shadow's brilliance still open to the sun IN MYSTIC SIGHT, IN MYSTIC NUMBERS arising from the dirt pile he looks up &amp; sees the world look up around him &amp; then he sees the world look down, prehensile, wrapped into a single body, brown, as big as anything, so that exclusion must remain a minus, a thing that can't be counted although he looks around, he looks back &amp; tries to count it: magic is its name, black thoughts its means of living in his mind &amp; being countedall day long pursued by someone who pursues it, he is like a fallen soul who finds a crust of bread, unnamed, the little savage, scrambling up a foreign street &amp; jams it, helpless, drowning, down a hungry sister's mouth &amp; throat
it's just like a coffin's inside when you die, pretentious and shiny and not too wide dear god there's a portrait over the door very notable of the sultan's nose pullable and rosy flanked by the scrumptious magdalene of whoisit and madame something by gainsborough just the playthings for dustn'est-ce pas effendi drifts between tables like an old leaf between toadstools he is the cheerfulest of men his peaked head smoulders like a new turd in April his legs are brittle and small his feet large and fragile his queer hands twitter before him, like foolish butterflies he is the most courteous of men should you remark the walls have been repapered he will nod like buddha or answer modestly i am dying so let us come in together and drink coffee covered with froth half-mud and not too sweet?
<> Who hid her spirit of rapture from the Greek, Whereby our art excelleth the antique, Perfecting formal beauty to the ear; Thou that hast been in England many a year The interpreter who left us nought to seek, Making Bethoven's inmost passion speak, Bringing the soul of great Sebastian near.  Their music liveth ever, and 'tis just That thou, good Joachim, so high thy skill, Rank (as thou shalt upon the heavenly hill) laurel'd with them, for thy ennobling trust Remember'd when thy loving hand is still And every ear that heard thee stopt with dust.
Art-galleries have the musky, uninhabited smell of churches, the sweet-sour smell of places where no-one eats, drinks or makes love. Here is somewhere one should come, one May morning,  without an appointment, to warm one's hands before a Gauguin or to cool them at a Manet or to sip a Lauren&ccedil;in through a straw; instead of which one is oneself, a person come to look at pictures among other people come to look at pictures; listening to the remarks the deferential do not make and the stifled coughs of schoolmistresses and the other silences; knowing that the soul has paid that spiritual gate-money Time  at the door and must account for it this evening, at the audit of dinner,  to friends. Here birdsong is caged and rebellion glazed and varnished by the tactless promiscuity of Fame or the flattery of Death. Here even the present is past. Here nothing stirs but used epigrams tangled in pointing fingers and eulogies fluttering, unnoticed, to the floor.
When Friedrich walks beside the shimmering melancholy Baltic what he sees with his eyes is sandy dunes and reeds and tufts of bunch-grass but what he sees in his mind is great blank skies through which at intervals tall clouds move in vast parabolas over gloomy summits whose lower zones are enclosed in mists and fogs and a crepuscular kind of light that lets ancient fir trees hoist their vaults in quiet contemplation of the eternity in one patch of moss on the side of a rock
 and the walls were very white, the girl being interrogated was speaking slowly but her words were lost in the gunbursts coming up from the street   slumped in the caf&eacute;, featureless brown room  with a radio blaring, one window  opening on a filthy garden  with a sort of chickenrun   whether he was only drunk, or dead    &lsquo;the audience has no means of knowing   and that's it&rsquo; / in the skyscraper lift    at the nineteenth floor    &lsquo;All right, 20 thousand    cheap at the price&rsquo;  no, the interrogation was long before. She went into the country      the junction not     &lsquo;like&rsquo; a spider's web     keeps catching trains      the bridges he'd been over      really a blank sky ALL REACTIONARIES ARE PAPER TIGERS  she'd come to the bridge without knowing it but it was already too late, they had their dogs, easy even without searchlights  BUT THEY ARE ALSO REAL TIGERS WHO HAVE DEVOURED MILLIONS OF PEOPLE   &lsquo;It isn't cinema at all   without a flow of images,   Godard's destroying the cinema&rsquo; BUT ON THE OTHER HAND THEY ARE PAPER TIGERS BECAUSE NOW THE PEOPLE HAVE POWER  and the coup&eacute; slid over  in a cool clich&eacute; into the sea
She was her mother. But now she was a bride of Christ. Holy Sisters -of-Something-or-Other, garbed in white linen. For seven years her mother had been there, a cloistered order, three hours north of Montreal. The drive began with snow. They took turns at the wheel, her husband first, barely speaking. The marriage had come apart, that much both of them understood, &amp; to tell her mother seemed the right thing to do, though her mother had never approved of them. The snow fell in thick pasty clumps, &amp; they dreaded the thought of having to spend a night in that grim town by the cloister, its dingy hotel. They waited against the bars &amp; wire mesh  the &ldquo;speech grille&rdquo; it was called. To touch was not forbidden, but only with the fingertips &amp; you had to strain to inch them through the wire. Candelabrum on the table, guttering. Nowhere to sit, &amp; you were given five minutes. For years her mother had been suffering from cataracts, &amp; as she approached the thick half-circles of her lenses flashed in the candlelight, clumsy halos on the swaddled, wimpled head. She had planned this moment for months, but now what was there to say? Her mother's face, far off &amp; refracted as the three stood silent. Then the drill &amp; flicker of the fingers through the mesh.
Dancing slowly like the giant flickering flames fed on black oil that devastate the people's houses and blight future green forever was my disastrous past, and the present a blazing ghost wears on his face a frightful mask and his footsteps are soft and sure. But being next to you the hours stand still nowhere to go having arrived. Next to you or making love or in my house are all equally solemn and final. The words we speak are like touching each other's faces, and we have gently fallen asleep holding hands.
Just to keep the heart's simple given beat through a neighbour's striptease or a friend's suicide. To keep one's hand away from the kitchen knife through that returning weekly need to maim oneself or carve up wife and child. Always and everywhere, to eat three square meals at regular hours; suppress that itch to take a peek at the dead street- dog before the scavengers come. Not to be caught dead at sea, battle, riot, adultery or hate nor between the rollers of a giant lathe. Yes, to keep it cool when strangers&rsquo; children hiss as if they knew what none could know nor guess. At the bottom of all this bottomless enterprise to keep simple the heart's given beat, the only risk is heartlessness.
It is a large room which smells like an attic, where mold eats at the deep blue walls. There are frames hanging where the grim faces anxiously, but reticently, watch your progress. There is probably an old bed holding a woman with snow-white teeth and a thick carpet of matted leaves which hiss as you pace around looking for the thing which bears your name. These are facts you know when you get in your car. What you do not know is the color of the house which keeps them, the street number and neighborhood. That is what you look for staying up late at night, reading the Esso map where all roads run off into the infinite blue border. When at last you go to bed, dream of the color of cities, massive yellows, rural greens. In one of them a window will open and you will see what you have been afraid of, what is in the eyes of those faces: you, naked, floating in a vast blue room.
When things go wrong, as they often will,  And it's hard to understand, Just whistle a song, as you face the mill,  And take your work in hand, And do your best, however men sneer, And 't will all come right, somehow, my dear,  'T will all come right somehow. Stick to the work that you have to do,  And whatever it is, don't mind; Just whistle a song of dreams-come-true,  And in the end you'll find, A word will help and a smile will cheer However the work may go, my dear,  However the work may go.
Rest, oh rest in peaceful slumber!  'Neath the sod and mouldring clay; Thou art with death's chosen people;  In his charge you 've passed away Three score ten, and more thy summers,  Thou hast labored not in vain; Thou hast wrought the task assigned thee;  &ldquo;Sow, and thou shalt reap again.&rdquo; And thy spirit crossed the river,  When the even sun was low; When old Jordan's tide was calmest;  And the storm-winds cease to blow. In that harbor, safely landed,  On the shore of Beulah Land, White-robed angels all around thee,  Reaching for the pilgrim's hand, While the harp rings out with anthems,  And the choir, a mighty throng, Joins in unison, the music,  As they sing a blissful song. And the Saviour comes to greet thee,  And His son He proudly own; Saying &ldquo;Well done faithful servant,  Welcome to my Father's throne.&rdquo; So we'll bid each friend and kindred,  Dry their weeping, tearful, eyes; And rejoice that he 's in heaven,  In that Land beyond the skies. Should our lives be three score summers,  May we leave a name like this; Then, we'll wear a cown, in Glory,  In the land of Heavenly Bliss.
I see your face where I have seen no one. It is a mystery, a river, a talking dog. Say your name. My name is noise. She explained: he doesn't like dogs because they say his name, raucous, imperator-tone, harsh calling <> This business of calling. As if a prophet in a leafy elm wood heard the sunlight talking and the flurry of blackbirds in the leaves made the shadows into women walking and everything spoke. Most of it he couldn't hear and most of that he couldn't understand, but what he could, took home and made a life of, and you believe it too, my mormons, you who gasp to apprehend every morning in the sky the round gold plate of the Yellow Emperor till meaning hurts your eyes.
<> dear child! Priestess of Joy, and things that holy are; Under thy smile men's hearts are reconciled, And after thy light, they follow, as a star Follows the moon across the tide A constant wooer at its side. And I will follow, follow thee so far Across the tide of life, and will adore And worship thee in visions evermore. O Maiden of shy innocence I say Thou art too fair to live in widowhood; Since Keats, thy lover, sleeps in Roman clay, For thee to be forsaken were not good. I fain would be thy wooer, Thou canst not find one truer, For I will love thee in whatever mood Thy sensitive and most delicate soul Doth on my spirit work its sweet control. And it shall nevermore be truly said The glory of the world hath passed away; Ah, no! the heart of dreams shall raise its head And Poesy again will hold her sway. Oh, give me power to teach The wonder of thy speech, And give thy heavenly message to our day: For the barren hearts of men have need Of the humane influence of thy creed.
<> The wind walks Bringing change. We walk Bringing good news. Millions of little flowers will carpet the earth. Wind walks. Whistles blow Holiday. (See the daisy, see the dandelion, see the buttercup, See, spatter of petal, the spangle, the sprint, The sprigs, tassels, twirls, The hug-the-ground stars; The dizzy-dally-daisy, Dimple-dapple-daisy, Up and down the hills.) Come walk with the wind, little children. The wind walks Bringing change.
She prays for father, mother dear,  To Him with thunder shod, She prays for every falling tear  In the holy church of God. For all good men now fallen ill,  For merry men that weep, For holiest teachers of His will,  And common men that sleep. The sunlight flickering on the pews,  The sunlight in the air, The flies that dance in threes, in twos,  They seem to join her prayer  Her prayer for father, mother dear,  To Him with thunder shod, A prayer for every falling tear  In the holy church of God.
Yes, that's how I was, I know that face, That bony figure Without grace Of flesh or limb; In health happy, Careless of the claim Of the world's sick Or the world's poor; In pain craven  Lord, breathe once more On that sad mirror, Let me be lost In mist for ever Rather than own Such bleak reflections. Let me go back On my two knees Slowly to undo The knot of life That was tied there.
She died in the upstairs bedroom  By the light of the ev'ning star That shone through the plate glass window  From over Leamington Spa. Beside her the lonely crochet  Lay patiently and unstirred, But the fingers that would have work'd it  Were dead as the spoken word. And Nurse came in with the tea-things  Breast high 'mid the stands and chairs  But Nurse was alone with her own little soul,  And the things were alone with theirs. She bolted the big round window,  She let the blinds unroll, She set a match to the mantle,  She covered the fire with coal. And &ldquo;Tea!&rdquo; she said in a tiny voice  &ldquo;Wake up! It's nearly  Oh! Chintzy, chintzy cheeriness,  Half dead and half alive! Do you know that the stucco is peeling?  Do you know that the heart will stop? From those yellow Italianate arches  Do you hear the plaster drop? Nurse looked at the silent bedstead,  At the gray, decaying face, As the calm of a Leamington ev'ning  Drifted into the place. She moved the table of bottles  Away from the bed to the wall; And tiptoeing gently over the stairs  Turned down the gas in the hall.
Kind kinderpark For bear buffoons And fluid graces  Who dreamed this lark Of spouts, lagoons, And huge fur faces? For bears designed Small nooks, great crags, And Gothic mountains? For bears refined Delightful snags, Waterfalls, fountains? Who had the wit to root A forked tree where a sack Of honey plumps on end, A rich-bottomed fruit To rouse a hearty whack From passing friend? Who ever did imagine A waterspout as stool, Or was black bear the wiser Who sat down on this engine To keep a vast rump cool. Then, cooled, set free a geyser? Who dreamed a great brown queen Sleeked down in her rough silk Flirting with her huge lord, Breast-high in her tureen?  &ldquo;Splash me, delightful hulk!&rdquo; So happy and absurd. Bear upside-down, white splendor, All creamy, foaming fur, And childhood's rug come true, All nonchalance and candor, Black pads your signature  Who, above all, dreamed you? When natural and formal Are seen to mate so well, Where bears and fountains play, Who would return to normal? Go back to human Hell? Not I. I mean to stay, To hold this happy chance Forever in the mind, To be where waters fall And archetypes still dance, As they were once designed In Eden for us all.
The burden of the unintelligible world is not, to me, its unintelligibility, it is my ineradicable and natural conviction that the operation of stars must, in the end, make well, a little sense. What happens when I spend my life contemplating a meaningless and therefore unanswerable conundrum? I grow daily more and more certain it foreshadows an answer but is there a cipher that conveys no message? I suspect that the only communication possible between primates is conveyed via the emotion evoked by images and that all intellectual operations fail at heart to communicate anything whatsoever. Why did Piero della Francesca abandon painting and devote himself at last to mathematics? For the same reason as he painted his Ideal City as a place without people. The memories that go to make up or construct the museum of the imagination possess the rather frightening ability to break out of their glass cases and run riot throughout the intellectual corridors. What they are trying desperately to find is the home of a world that remains, thank god, unintelligible.
Stones, brown tufted grass, but no water, it is dry to the bottom. A seedy eye of orange hawkweed blinks in sunlight stupidly, a mink bumbles away, a ringnecked snake among stones lifts its head like a spark, a dead young woodcock  long dead, the mink will not touch it  sprawls in the hatchment of its soft plumage and clutches emptiness with drawn talons. This is the ravine today. But in spring it cascaded, in winter it filled with snow until it lay hidden completely. In time, geologic time, it will melt away or deepen beyond recognition, a huge gorge. These are what I remember and foresee. These are what I see here every day, not things but relationships of things, quick changes and slow. These are my sorrow, for unlike my bright admonitory friends I see relationships, I do not see things. These, such as they are, every day, every unique day, the first in time and the last, are my thoughts, the sequences of my mind. I wonder what they mean. Every day, day after day, I wonder what they mean.
&amp; night &amp; the rolling wheels of the column of the army trailing in along the park. He looked up &amp; glanced at her across the instrument while still continuing to play. It was almost like looking in a mirror so very full of his own young features &amp; knowing his sadness deluding beautiful &amp; more compelling with every note. But instantly that seemed to fade. She stood as if with effort in the window-bay &amp; held her heart for all its beating. The sound gave way. Outside it blew afresh &amp; on the dressing-table strangely foreign the black shako with the death's head.
It is huge and full of difference. He calls it endless, or without end. Broad and solemn, like a midnight mass except it's afternoon and men are dying, not being born. Everything he ever saw is suddenly much less interesting than this almost nothing he's looking at now, nothing, nothing but this. The difference is called cloud, and in its own language it is womanly, full of shawls, iridescent silken cashmere, shawls and dances, slow dances. What does he owe this brightness, what can a man give to the sky?  <> <> <> <> <> <> <> the wound is worded, the words say this. He bleeds the way the sky once so long ago torn by a stone knife wielded, bled us.
The fray of meaning somehow comes through  the Other Conversation that means you. Interference is the only message. Communicate. Listen. It is your only chance, to hear what the world says of you ramble of a drunken man but no grape ever harvested speaks such wine as makes you babble. Yes, they all know you reach out for the maidenhead of things, you set your tent up in the wilderness of words, only inside the beast-skin of language are you safe from meaning. Listen, you are the last-born of the night, a day is finished when you walk in, coins go warm from hand to hand, something comes through faintly, down the buzzing wires, when you and only when you are silent then you hear the other world not clear, the line is busy with noises, hushes, scratches, deities in argument, luscious anger of their voices, all Titania and timber, woodwinds, water, a naked footstep on wet moss  and you hear all of it, all the hiss and crackle hoist and scimitar and lust, all sounded, gasped, grasped, somehow swallowed down before you know you'll never know  the ordinary meaning of what they say. You can't tell when the transmission ceases and you're just listening to the common static that passes for thinking, usual on such instruments  Now write down what you have heard. You can't expect anything to last, nothing is permanent, not even pain, the word as soon as it is spoken decays into that vast mistake called understanding.
<> Long, steel guns, Pointed from the war ships In the name of the war god. Straight, shining, polished guns, Clambered over with jackies in white blouses, Glory of tan faces, tousled hair, white teeth, Laughing lithe jackies in white blouses, Sitting on the guns singing war songs, war chanties. Shovels, Broad, iron shovels, Scooping out oblong vaults, Loosening turf and leveling sod. I ask you To witness  The shovel is brother to the gun.
She knows how to fold and turn the paper, guiding the scissors with care to create for her son five little dancing dolls. Toe by toe, hand in hand, <> watch them caper across the plain and up, up over the mountain, five happy men to amuse a small boy in bed. So cross. So bored. For all that, a little blond god, with the shifting realm of his risen knees to govern. The fauna buried in his landslides, the cities swallowed by his earthquakes no longer divert him. He monitors the marching of five chained men with silent intensity, grave as his liquid eyes. Up and down, up and down, his to command, one, two, three, four manikins spring by. He tears from the fifth an arm, and then a thigh. The troupe trips on, though sagging at one end. Four and a half dancing men. And the half he made with an act of his hand seems to please him best. He smiles. The same can be done with the rest. Four blind men, and a half, unafraid, unafraid.
&lsquo;Imperfect? Does anything human escape That sentence? And after all, we get along.&rsquo; But now we have fallen on evil times, Ours is the age of goody-goodiness. They are planning to kill the old Adam, Perhaps at this moment the blade is entering. And when the old Adam has ceased to live, What part of us but suffers a death? The body still walks and talks, The mind performs its mental movements. There is no lack of younger generation To meet the nation's needs. Skills shall abound. They inherit all we have to offer. Only the dead Adam is not transmissive. They will spread their narrowness into space, The yellow moon their whitewashed suburbs. He died in our generation, the old Adam. Are our children ours, who did not know him? We go to a nearby country, for juke-boxes and Irony. The natives mutter, &lsquo;Dirty old tourists!&rsquo; We return, and our children wrinkle their noses. Were we as they wish, few of them would be here! Too good for us, the evil times we have fallen on. Our old age shall be spent in disgrace and museums.
I had disappeared into grassland, the high plateau where the Missouri begins to claw its way south, where hail wets the wreckage of fields. I accept it gratefully, even this bitter pill. The chaos of the wind had taken me, like topsoil off a hill, dark steam churning, away from earth. But you kept me on your radar, Bill  you said,  <> <> Th&eacute;r&egrave;se cried in mortal illness  <> of death's bitter remedy, Bill, the sleep of grass, both root and blaze, the river ice waiting as time forms its word, the garden where we need not hide. <> as the feasts wheel round in the dark of the year, All Saints, All Souls; all song and story. Sing it now, Bill, let it come.
Dear uncle you are mostly home movies walking shyly smiling with the light you left me when you died into my mind I was nine I have looked for you ever since every day I find the trace of you the track of your dear feet sometimes naked sometimes a manly smell like the sleeves of my father's shirt sometimes the cool skin of the girl next door Loretta the busses still pass us where is she where are you you are veiled in the thick thing I have had to become to be you or be near you or speak with your voice old soldier old traveler lost in Russia your feet wrapped in rags stumbled all the way home to the Rhine my father found you in his song he stood in the choir and sang &ldquo;Panis Angelicus&rdquo; out loud in the desolate church who heard him who hears me singing to you now lord of every ever I meant the mild blue light I have stumbled to follow glued inside flowers flickering subways there is a river there is a thing worth hearing in the back of the north wind in my head whirlpools glitter with gold dust you carry me there in your hand you set me down at the wellhead I fall to the little house with the infinite cellar where I travel forever past all my dead uncles scrabbling paws of terrified raccoons it has to be this way you have gone there and carried your blue light your lost word waiting for your unborn children a place there is where nothing is left to remember.
If you ever find yourself, some where lost and surrounded by enemies who won't let you speak in your own language who destroy your statues &amp; instruments, who ban your omm bomm ba boom then you are in trouble deep trouble they ban your own boom ba boom you in deep deep trouble humph! probably take you several hundred years to get out!
There are things lovely and dangerous still the rain when the heat of an evening sweetens the darkness with mist and the eyes cannot see what the memory will of new pain when the headlights deceive like the windows wild birds believe to be air and bash bodies and wings on the glass when the headlights show space but the house and the room and the bed and your face are still there while I am mistaken and try to drive by the actual kiss of the world everywhere
My lovely ghosts are unaware of boundaries. They step from my dreams into the early morning air as if they were offering breakfast, the way they used to. They have my sculpted cheekbones, my severe hair. At dusk I see them reflected in the darkening windows beyond which, like static from a distant transmission, the bitter snow is starting to fall. Oh my lovely ghosts, when I speak your names aloud I think you forgive me.
The Old Vicarage, The Lodge, the farmer and the farmer's wife, Andromeda a damp smudge like mistletoe milk. It was safe to be just outside the pod of light, his breath cold on the coil of his scarf, her fingers combing his hair while she sang the descant Gloria. Beacon Court. Someone had hung a tourniquet of holly on the door and set cups for the mulled wine on a table by the Holy Poor. Three beasts were bedded down in a circlet of barnyard straw. It was all part of the same tall story, a sip of colostrum, the deep blue oxidized bloom of a marble found months later in the iris bed, the way she lifted him for that first good look at his infamous blood brother, focus of the mysterium.
The northern countryside of China Is bound by miles and miles of ice. Snow flies over the border, And outside of the Great Wall Waste land stretches as though endless. The great Hwang Ho rushes in torrents Up and down the skyline. The mountains thrash like silvery snakes, Their contours soar like waxen elephants Vying with the gods in height. On a fine day, The landscape unveils like a maiden Dressing up in her boudoir. Such enchanting mountains and rivers Have led countless heroes to rival in homage. Pity that the founders of Ch'in and Han Were unversed in the classics; Pity that the great kings of T'ang and Sung Were deficient in poetry; Pity that the magnificent, the pride of heaven, Genghis Khan Could only shoot with bows and arrows. All these were of the past! For the greatest man yet only My dynasty, my era will show.
Never think she loves him wholly, Never believe her love is blind, All his faults are locked securely In a closet of her mind; All his indecisions folded Like old flags that time has faded, Limp and streaked with rain, And his cautiousness like garments Frayed and thin, with many a stain  Let them be, oh let them be, There is treasure to outweigh them, His proud will that sharply stirred, Climbs as surely as the tide, Senses strained too taut to sleep, Gentleness to beast and bird, Humor flickering hushed and wide As the moon on moving water, And a tenderness too deep To be gathered in a word.
Alpha Schmalpha Tango Wango Jeez, it's hot; my vinyl interior warps like burned paper and the park is brown. Roger Wilko blocks the sticky end of Duncan Road. I wave my burning sleeves. The helicopter hangs from nothing blue. I change down and stare. Arthur Street, Roger; Roger, Cressy Road. Their dayglo limeline loops the melted neighbourhood, come out you are surrounded. I stop underneath a streetlight's insect head and ahem clean my shades. Much better: now I see each two-way birdbleep there  TWOC, TWOC, TWOC: Bolter's Timber Yard, its hot planks oozing gum: rayguns dazzle from The Crown's octagonal conservatory. Green through my wizard lenses I espy whose green abandoned car grunt-dead and oozy petrol slips, half-gas, away and he who done it in the glass I see like some hot fish swims round the great escape yard to yard. The birdie's eye, extending, cannot see somewhere near here Sir Plantivere went thump and thump his rot-bewildered nag went down and dumped him in the tangly tents of bogbriar, quaking grass and old bugs, eighteen, and the pleasured smash behind him and before and near here the raven's eye, whirring, taped the men of England fight aarrk-aarrk in Christendom and crap. The swamp weeps. Blood slips out between its gnashers oozy on the earth: I see together: glory glory hoodlum doodlum: one, the other; both and neither. Then I turn the key. My mirrors show me squares of summer and the winter deep in earth.
My father's sister, the one who died before there was a word for it, was fussy with her food. &lsquo;Eat up,&rsquo; they'd say to me, ladling a bowl with warning. What I remember's how she'd send me to the dairy, taught me to take cream, the standing gold. Where the jug dipped I saw its blue-milk skin before the surface healed. Breath held, tongue between teeth, I carried in the cream, brimmed, level, parallel, I knew, with that other, hidden horizon of the earth's deep ungleaming water-table. And she, more often than not half-dressed, stockings, a slip, a Chinese kimono, would warm the cream, pour it with crumbled melting cheese over a delicate white cauliflower, or field mushrooms steaming in porcelain, then watch us eat, relishing, smoking her umpteenth cigarette, glamorous, perfumed, starved, and going to die.
Never sing the same song twice  Lest she disbelieve it. Though reproved as over-nice, Never sing the same song twice  Unobjectionable advice,  Would you but receive it: Never sing the same song twice  Lest she disbelieve it. Never sing a song clean through,  You might disenchant her; Venture on a verse or two (Indisposed to sing it through), Let that seem as much as you  Care, or dare, to grant her; Never sing your song clean through,  You might disenchant her. Make no sermon on your song  Lest she turn and rend you. Fools alone deliver long Sermons on a May-day song; Even a smile may put you wrong,  Half a word may end you: Make no sermon on your song  Lest she turn and rend you.
Never until this night have I been stirred. The elaborate star-light throws a reflection On the dark stream, Till all the eddies gleam; And thereupon there comes that scream From terrified, invisible beast or bird: Image of poignant recollection. An image of my heart that is smitten through Out of all likelihood, or reason, And when at last, Youth's bitterness being past, I had thought that all my days were cast Amid most lovely places; smitten as though It had not learned its lesson. Why have you laid your hands upon my eyes? What can have suddenly alarmed you Whereon 'twere best My eyes should never rest? What is there but the slowly fading west, The river imaging the flashing skies, All that to this moment charmed you? A sweetheart from another life floats there As though she had been forced to linger From vague distress Or arrogant loveliness, Merely to loosen out a tress Among the starry eddies of her hair Upon the paleness of a finger. But why should you grow suddenly afraid And start I at your shoulder  Imagining That any night could bring An image up, or anything Even to eyes that beauty had driven mad, But images to make me fonder? Now she has thrown her arms above her head; Whether she threw them up to flout me, Or but to find, Now that no fingers bind, That her hair streams upon the wind, I do not know, that know I am afraid Of the hovering thing night brought me.
For the first time I find it quite unnerving That people's names are handed on to things. No bench, so far, has proved itself deserving Enough to bear your name. No hospice wings Or students' union buildings will inherit, If it has anything to do with me, A name no other man could even merit Let alone any slice of brick or tree. I could be Lord Mayor with a town to listen To my new street names; you would still be gone. Now, as myself, with power to rechristen No roads, there's still a tribute going on: Though I call nothing by your name, I do Practically nothing but call after you.
In the dream I was ten or eleven  It was a windy morning it was late morning. I had been ill  I had slept for a long time and the whole family had been waiting for me to wake up  My mother walking back and forth from my room to the kitchen  My brother wandering outside in the garden, approaching my window  My father walking through all the rooms in the house and pausing always to peer into mine  Suddenly the wind was louder and I woke up thinking leaves and vines had blown into my hair I tried to brush a vine away but the bright   greenness moved and turned into a small snake  And then I tried harder to fling the green snake away from me but then it turned into a cobra and after that it rippled blue and orange as I tried to get rid of it  Oh I was frantic, desperate with fear as the snake simply grew stronger and larger constantly changing    its colours  as if trying to win me over with its shimmering scarlets and blacks  then always slipping out of my grasp and yet refusing to go away  And my father, who stood watching in the doorway laughed and said, &lsquo;Don't resist. You must accept it. There's no point   in fighting with the snake &rsquo;
how much the moon may be the wind different places thinking men forms variously size the thickness like statues out back round earth square miles between poles imagine upside down polynesia caves radio track dishes to hear dim stars the sky a field sheep horses mines cities everywhere on the eyeballs particles deserts streams the oceans curve piss, for one thing to make things go
This lonely hour in autumn, this thick November sky, Memory hovers above us like the threat of rain Or razor blades of sun and shooting stars. I could never catch a baseball, never throw one. At bat or in the field, I'd chop madly and flail My windmill arms at the air, at the air, All under the jeering, brilliant laughter of the blue, &ldquo;Easy out. Easy out!&rdquo; When at last you knew the sky was falling You were too sick to go outside, even when lightning Broke the day into pieces shimmering down. But in my dream you bolted from the bed. You ran to us, screaming &ldquo;Save me. Save me!&rdquo; And we held you tight, held onto your visible bones. Now I, too, have started to thin and sweat and cough. Once again the low clouds conspire, playground bullies Their laughter bursting into gloom and gray. Dust already gathers at the grit line of my teeth. Ash coats my skin like a uniform with no number. The wind whirls through the deserted diamond field, And my hands scramble at the fast falling sky, And a sudden, unknown voice cries out: &ldquo;Come on, catch it. You can do it. Catch it.&rdquo;
We stand pinned to the electric mural of Mexican history and listen to a paid guide explain fresco technique and the vision of Diego Rivera: Cortes, crippled with disease, his Indian woman and son, sailor raping an Indian in frocks of priesthood. In the center the Mexican eagle peels the serpent and cools his thirst on desert cactus; Hidalgo forced into Independence, that bald creole iconoclast lost east of Guadalajara; near him, Montezuma passively meets Cortes, salutes the Gods, dies, the mistake of his people; corn mixes with chickens and goats, housepets, muskets and cactus wine. To your left Rockefeller, Morgan, the atomic bomb, Wall Street, the pipeline to the Vatican; below, the Mexican people pay for the chosen friar and the dignity of retreat to the hills above the central valley. Then comes Juarez our guide's voice rings with full-blooded pride at the full-blooded Indian busting the military; he disbands the church, opens his arms, and gives the land to the people. Our guide is speaking in Spanish: &ldquo;You see, my friends, we want the land that Santa Anna gave you for ten million pesos; we want Texas, Arizona and the rest of the west; take the painting, absorb it  then give us back our land.&rdquo;
In the April sun Shuffling, shapeless, bent, Cobweb-eyed, with stick Searching, one by one, Gutter-heaps, intent Wretched rags to pick. Oh, is this a man?  Man, whose spirit erect Trampling circumstance, Death and evil, can Measure worlds, nor checked By fell time and chance, With undaunted eye, With a mouth of song, Front the starry blue?  (O you passers-by, Moving swift and strong, Answer, what seek you?) Husk of manhood, mere Shrivel of his kind!  In a bloodless mask How the old eyes peer, With no light behind!  Mate of his mean task; Yet this wreckage fill With a thought, possess With a faith's empire, It shall be a will Mightier than the seas, Man, more dread than fire!
Now you embrace chameleons changing color yourself with the scenery, white with me and my white questions, muted under a sky bruised black and blue. You feed your lizards moths, plundered each evening from the porch light while my shudder records as accurately as a seismograph the distance between us. Peter, we have given you these hand me downs: your brother's half used sweater, your father's reel, and all my old faults drowned once like a bagful of cats. They have washed up twenty years downstream bloated and mewing, to plague the perfect body you will grow into, shaking all of us delicately off.
All immaterial beauty, night and storm, And wind and light, assume a different splendor To such as see with the mind's eye and render Worship to Nature of invisible form; The sunset is a cauldron, where a charm Is brewed; and dusk, a mighty Witch of Endor, Busy with mystery; evoking slender Dream-spirits of the stars that round her swarm. Who has not walked with such, not felt the air Of their swift passage, on the wind from far, And followed footsteps heard within the heart, Shall never feel strange fingers in his hair, Lifting his soul into some farthest star, Nor of his dreams become immortal part.
I sought the sanctum of a bird,  I wanted information; I simply asked for just one word,  To help in dedication. Chirped the birdie, &ldquo;Its an honor,  If it is for the children; For their holy, sacred corner,  I'll give you half a million.&rdquo; &ldquo;Little sisters, little brothers,  I've a message from above; Told to me to tell to others,  Its a heart brim full of love.&rdquo; &ldquo;While time is fresh and hope is new,  While youth is lingering nigh, Keep noble things within thy view,  Look up toward the sky.&rdquo; &ldquo;I often think how the angels  Are near us both night and day, Let us prevent evil passions,  From driving them far away.&rdquo; &ldquo;Just like dear, good little children,  Let's try to obedient stay, Of the sins and strifes of this world,  And we'll hear what angels say.&rdquo;
The red earth, the light diffuse In the flat-leaved limbs of the trees; A cold, perpetual rain As though from a heaving breast; O loved ones, O angels ... The thing, as always, begins In transit, the water infusion Oily and phosphorescent  The vine is a blue light, The cup is a star. In the dream you will see a city, Foreign and repetitious, The plants unspeakably green; That is of no concern; your job Is the dust, the belly-relinquishing dust. It's the day before yesterday, It's the other side of the sky: The body that bears your number Will not be new, will not be your own And will not remember your name.
There is something in me so cruel, so silent. It hesitates to sit on the grass with the young white virgins of my time. The blood- letter, clothed in what it is. Elemental essence, animal grace, not that, but a rude stink of color huger, more vast, than this city suffocating. Red street. Waters noise in the ear, inside the hard bone of the brain. Inside the soft white meat of the feelings. Inside your flat white stomach I move my tongue
Ours are the streets where Bess first met her cancer. She went to work every day past the secure houses. At her job in the library she arranged better and better flowers, and when students asked for books her hand went out to help. In the last year of her life she had to keep her friends from knowing how happy they were. She listened while they complained about food or work or the weather. And the great national events danced their grotesque, fake importance. Always Pain moved where she moved. She walked ahead; it came. She hid; it found her. No one ever served another so truly; no enemy ever meant so strong a hate. It was almost as if there was no room left for her on earth. But she remembered where joy used to live. She straightened its flowers; she did not weep when she passed its houses; and when finally she pulled into a tiny corner and slipped from pain, her hand opened again, and the streets opened, and she wished all well.
What did you do in Sodom Town? How did you sin in Paris?  I heard the small talk rise and die down  And thought: &lsquo;Her hands are tiny and brown.  Curse on the time that tarries!&rsquo; What did you do twixt then and now, Since it is past eleven?  I heard the talk run anyhow  And thought: &lsquo;How brown and broad her brow,  And her white teeth how even!&rsquo; What will you do twixt now and when You hide 'neath carven marble?  I do not know; but I know', then  I'll hear you laugh with gentlemen  With your laugh like the blackbird's warble.
When I consider the children of the middle class as representatives of phenomena to my subject sense I can hardly see them at all, they fade into the shrubbery, of which a superabundance is  or distracted, leaning my mind on some green bosom. But then they are things-in-themselves, these children, and their glee is a thing-in-itself, their exuberance as they terrorize one another, wiping themselves out in a continuum of destruction, themselves as surrogates of parents. But the parents remain representations, never things-in-themselves, but only shadow-figures taking out the garbage; and thus the Will of Schopenhauer's essay leaps out at me in children-in-themselves, starker than stones or stars, so that I cower; for the future is theirs, day by day they remove it from the plastic wrap of non-being, and leave it on the death-strewn lawns. Yes, if will is all we know of ourselves as things, and thence of all things, how can I not infer a radical divergence of degree between everything else and children? The spirea dies, the little nebulae of viburnum wink out in willing whatness, but the children's shrieks of bliss and triumph are merciless, raging from another world, another time, so that all understanding is blocked and thrust back as mere knowledge, odious data, nauseating demonstrations, these relentless present children of the middle class.
<>  They've gone to come no more; When we sat around, as the sun went down,  'Bout Hen' Clay's grocery store; And talking o'er the latest news about the country folks,  Or tried to tell the biggest yarn, or crack the biggest joke. Those good old days of boyhood!  How sweet to me they seem; I oft look back on my boyhood's track,  In a melancholy dream And view the distant landscape of wooded hills around.  And catch again the merry strain, Of the wild wood's cheerful sound. Those good old days of boyhood!  I recollect so well, Still in mine ear, can plainly hear,  The chimes of the old school bell; I see the child like faces,  Worn by my school mates then, The girls have grown up to women:  And the boys have grown to men. Those good old days of boyhood!  Are sweet to look upon; When laughing, boys with childish joys,  We swam in Schenck's Old Pond: And oft mong Cosbey's Pasture Hills,  In streamlets searched the frog, Or chased the squirrel up a tree, a rabbit in a log. Those good old days of boyhood!  I long for them again; To scamper and play in the mows of hay,  And list to the falling rain: And read about &ldquo;Jack and his Bean Stalk,&rdquo;  Or &ldquo;Alice in Great Wonder Land:&rdquo; And wish to be a wee fairy, or a great big giant man. Those good old days of boyhood!  Alas! they've drifted by; Our old play ground is changed around,  I breathe a parting sigh: For here the country people, have caught the city air,  And changed these spots to village lots; Excepting here and there. Those good old days of boyhood!  I will no more repeat; My heart was glad but its growing sad,  As those bygone scenes I meet: Since my barque has drifted mong strangers,  Few, few are the lads that I know, I find not the joys, I had mong the boys,  In the days long, long ago.
On a shining day of October we remembered you, Commander,  When the trees were gold and still And some of their boughs were green where the whip of the wind had missed them  On this nippy Staffordshire hill. A clean sky streamed through institutional windows  As we heard the whirr of Time Touching our Quaker silence, in builders' lorries departing  For Newcastle-under-Lyme. The proving words of the psalm you bequeathed to the gowned assembly  On waiting silence broke, &lsquo;Lord, I am not high-minded ...&rsquo; In the youthful voice of the student  Your own humility spoke. I remembered our shared delight in architecture and nature  As bicycling we went By saffron-spotted palings to crumbling box-pewed churches  Down hazel lanes in Kent. I remembered on winter evenings, with wine and the family round you,  Your reading Dickens aloud And the laughs we used to have at your gift for administration,  For you were never proud. Sky and sun and the sea! the greatness of things was in you  And thus you refrained your soul. Let others fuss over academical detail,   &lsquo;Lord, I am not high-minded ...&rsquo; The final lesson you taught me,  When you bade the world good-bye, Was humbly and calmly to trust in the soul's survival  When my own hour comes to die.
My father was black, black as suede, black as the ace of spades, black as the grave. Black humbled him and made him proud. At first there was a space between us, a mirror flashed back at me. Then his blackness entered me like God.
From the Faraway Nearby  of Georgia O'Keeffe these words  Black Iris Dark Iris Abstraction, Blue  her hands around a skull  &ldquo;The plains the wonderful  great big sky makes me  want to breathe so deep  that I'll break &rdquo; From her Train at Night in the Desert  I its only passenger  I see as they pass by her red hills  black petals landscapes with skulls  &ldquo;There is so much of it  I want to get outside of it all  I would if I could  even if it killed me &rdquo;
My father writes all day, all night: Writes while he sleeps, writes in his coffin. It's nice and quiet in our house. You can see the specks of dust in the sunlight. I look at times over his shoulders At all that whiteness. The snow is falling, As you'd expect. A drop of ink Gets buried easily, like a footprint. I, too, would get lost but there's his shadow On the wall, like a perched owl. There's the sound of his pen And the bottle on the table sunk in thought. When the bottle empties, His great dark hand Bigger than the earth Feels for the moon's spigot.
The silver and violet leopard of the night Spotted with stars and smooth with silence sprang; And though three doors stood open, the end of light Closed like a trap; and stillness was a clang. Under the leopard sky of lurid stars I strove with evil sleep the hot night long, Dreams dumb and swollen of triumphs without wars, Of tongueless trumpet and unanswering gong. I saw a pale imperial pomp go by, Helmet and horn&egrave;d mitre and heavy wreath; Their high strange ensigns hung upon the sky And their great shields were like the doors of death. Their mitres were as moving pyramids And all their crowns as marching towers were tall; Their eyes were cold under their carven lids And the same carven smile was on them all. Over a paven plain that seemed unending They passed unfaltering till it found an end In one long shallow step; and these descending Fared forth anew as long away to wend. I thought they travelled for a thousand years; And at the end was nothing for them all, For all that splendour of sceptres and of spears, But a new step, another easy fall. The smile of stone seemed but a little less, The load of silver but a little more: And ever was that terraced wilderness And falling plain paved like a palace floor. Rust red as gore crawled on their arms of might And on their faces wrinkles and not scars: Till the dream suddenly ended; noise and light Loosened the tyranny of the tropic stars. But over them like a subterranean sun I saw the sign of all the fiends that fell; And a wild voice cried &ldquo;Hasten and be done, Is there no steepness in the stairs of hell?&rdquo; He that returns, He that remains the same, Turned the round real world, His iron vice; Down the grey garden paths a bird called twice, And through three doors mysterious daylight came.
Novels about peasants are generally good (In general the peasantry is good) They may sound rather boring But they are not One of them is entitled &lsquo;The Well&rsquo; And set in a remote village Where are many hardships Another is called &lsquo;The Village&rsquo; Concerning a peasant and his wife Who have two sons And each son has a wife (If the Chinese professor sounds rather boring It is due to the translation But he is not) Was one of the sons The son who laid himself flat on a frozen river To melt the ice and furnish his parents With fresh fish in the winter? No, that is not a contemporary writing It is a very old story We have better ways of melting the ice Nowadays Do peasants ever write such novels? If they do they are not peasants Do they read them? A chuckle, translated as a chuckle (One has met at most one Chinese peasant The only villager to own a television set He was proudly illiterate) No, &lsquo;Golden Lotus&rsquo; was long ago It is true that sex was making a come-back Until it suffered a set-back (London is a large urban centre There are beggars but no peasants The lecture room is centrally heated Sex has suffered a minor set-back But our hardships are relatively light Soon there will be a break for coffee.)
<> <> Supererogatory divinations one is lured on by! The routine is decent. As if the white page were a clean tablecloth, as if the vacuumed floor were a primed canvas, as if new earrings made from old shells of tasty abalone were nose rings for the two most beautiful girls of a meticulous island, whose bodies are oiled as one oils a table of teak ... Hypocrisies of seemly hope, performed to make a place for miracles to occur; and if the day is no day for miracles, then the preparations are an order one may rest in. But one doesn't want rest, one wants miracles. Each time that note changes (which is whenever you let it) the kettle (already boiling) passing into enlightenment without a moment's pause, out of fury into quiet praise desire wakes again.  It is to hunt a white deer in snowy woods. Beaten you fall asleep in the afternoon on a sofa. And wake to witness, softly backing away from you, mollified, all that the room had insisted on  eager furniture, differentiated planes ... Twilight has come, the windows are big and solemn, brimful of the afterglow; and sleep has swept through the mind, loosening brown leaves from their twigs to drift out of sight beyond the horizon's black rooftops. A winter's dirt makes Indian silk squares of the windowpanes, semi transparent, a designed middle distance. The awakening is to transformation, word after word.
They are poisoning the air and the water I must daily breathe and drink I watch my family breathe and drink the poisons they are told they breathe and drink They feed the winter streets with salt I feed my car and shoes to the salt. They ask for my son so I give him to be trained for their purposes to be taken away They block my windows with buildings then offer the moon live on TV They hide the country behind billboards urging me to move to the country They cut down the forests surrounding the city I have made my home with their foods They force me to work in their unions then force me to strike They raise my wages then raise the prices They wire that my son is dead and wire the money for burial I bury him with their money They urge me to vote and I vote They tax me I give them my money I curse them on each of these counts and on others They accurately record my complaints
You who desired so much in vain to ask  Yet fed your hunger like an endless task, Dared dignify the labor, bless the quest  Achieved that stillness ultimately best, Being, of all, least sought for: Emily, hear! O sweet, dead Silencer, most suddenly clear When singing that Eternity possessed And plundered momently in every breast;  Truly no flower yet withers in your hand. The harvest you descried and understand Needs more than wit to gather, love to bind. Some reconcilement of remotest mind  Leaves Ormus rubyless, and Ophir chill. Else tears heap all within one clay-cold hill.
Even the old emotions are finished, we have worn them out. And desire is dead. And the end of all things is inside us. Our epoch is over, a cycle of evolution is finished, our activity has lost its meaning, we are ghosts, we are seed; for our word is dead and we know not how to live wordless. We live in a vast house full of inordinate activities, and the noise, and the stench, and the dreariness and lack of meaning madden us, but we don't know what to do. All we can know at this moment is the fulfilment of nothingness. Lo, I am nothing! It is a consummation devoutly to be wished in this world of mechanical self-assertion.
<> and made it a little thing. They were held to the land and horses; they were held to the little seas. They have changed and shaped and welded; they have broken the old tools and made new ones; they are ranging the white scarves of cloudland; they are bumping the sunken bells of the Carthaginians and Ph&oelig;nicians: they are handling the strongest sea as a thing to be handled. The earth was a call that mocked; it is belted with wires and meshed with steel; from Pittsburg to Vladivostok is an iron ride on a moving house; from Jerusalem to Tokyo is a reckoned span; and they talk at night in the storm and salt, the wind and the war. They have counted the miles to the Sun and Canopus; they have weighed a small blue star that comes in the southeast corner of the sky on a foretold errand. We shall search the sea again. We shall search the stars again. There are no bars across the way. There is no end to the plan and the clue, the hunt and the thirst. The motors are drumming, the leather leggings and the leather coats wait: Under the sea and out to the stars we go.
I recognize the quiet and the charm, This safe enclosed room where a woman sews And life is tempered, orderly, and calm. Through the Dutch door, half-open, sunlight streams And throws a pale square down on the red tiles. The cosy black dog suns himself and dreams. Even the bed is sheltered, it encloses, A cupboard to keep people safe from harm, Where copper glows with the warm flush of roses. The atmosphere is all domestic, human, Chaos subdued by the sheer power of need. This is a room where I have lived as woman, Lived too what the Dutch painter does not tell  The wild skies overhead, dissolving, breaking, And how that broken light is never still, And how the roar of waves is always near, What bitter tumult, treacherous and cold, Attacks the solemn charm year after year! It must be felt as peace won and maintained Against those terrible antagonists  How many from this quiet room have drowned? How many left to go, drunk on the wind, And take their ships into heartbreaking seas; How many whom no woman's peace could bind? Bent to her sewing, she looks drenched in calm. Raw grief is disciplined to the fine thread. But in her heart this woman is the storm; Alive, deep in herself, holds wind and rain, Remaking chaos into an intimate order Where sometimes light flows through a windowpane.
On the wide Texan and New Mexican ranches They call them prairie oysters, but here on the Pacific coast-range, Mountain oysters. The spring round-up was finished, The calves had been cut and branded and their ears notched, And staggered with their pain up the mountain. A vast rose and gold sunset, very beautiful, made in April, Moved overhead. The men had gone down to the ranch-house, But three old men remained by the dying branding-fire At the corral gate, Lew Clark and Gilchrist And Onofrio the Indian; they searched the trampled Earth by the fire, gathering the testicles of gelded bull-calves Out of the bloody dust; they peeled and toasted them Over the dying branding-fire and chewed them down, Grinning at each other, believing that the masculine glands Would renew youth. The unhappy calves bawled in their pain and their mothers answered them. The vast sunset, all colored, all earnest, all golden, withdrew a little higher but made a fierce heart Against the sea-line, spouting a sudden red glare like the eye of God. The old men Chewed at their meat. I do not believe the testicles of bull-calves Will make an old man young again, but if they could  What fools those old men are. Age brings hard burdens, But at worst cools hot blood and sets men free From the sexual compulsions that madden youth. Why would they dip their aging bodies again Into that fire? For old men death's the fire. Let them dream beautiful death, not women's loins.
<> <> Off the bilgey bottom, off the petrifying weighs I am chopping the old ballast that has leaned on my eyes, and now I know a topmast is where I'll look to sea. <> <> My rages will not stutter now behind the grimy burners where my shovel-thumbs blistered soothing an old furnace, for off slid the anchor when I launched my own free. <> <> No sticker-in-the-mud will longer barnacle my travel. Now off is rubbed the rust and the glue from my keel and scrubbed swim the mermaids round my brand new me.
This is the quest beyond silences where mountains are inventions. Where islands reside in dreams and dreams. The hereafter. As affirmation. The blues hung over chasms. Debts excavate. A calendar of hurts. Ellison subpoenas for his invisible parlor of the nameless. Two steps behind the veil DuBois coils in psalms with licorice nightsticks of moans to beat mornings from lullabyes chains swore to darkness. A hornman barters with St. Peter. At the gaze of trumpets. Miles, wide legged, shoulders arched for myths, interprets the numbers: thirty-two buckets of bop for a pinch of salt and one soul. To board the Trane somewhere above heaven in low keys and chordal disturbances. Sit-ins by Max. Mister PC on freedom rides in lowlands of sorrow. This minister of laughter and satire. Re-invents legends. The saxophone as womb. Tenor as mother. His sounds are wife-in-laws. Sitting, notebooks in hands, to capture tales they inside tumbling in distances he blows for a ballad's intoxicated bit of sense. He blows. He blows. The nights into volumes
<> A charming little buggy, scarce large enough for two, Dashed down a narrow little street and stopped beside a gate, Where a charming little lassie dwelt, a lad had met of late. Out stepped a little body, looking like a happy bride; He gently stood and placed her in a safe seat at his side: &ldquo;I'm going to show you now,&rdquo; said he (with eyes that twinkle merry). &ldquo;The very prettiest of drives, it leads to Clements' Ferry.&rdquo; &ldquo;If you have never head of it, my darling little treasure, I'll tell you all about the place, it will afford me pleasure.&rdquo; And on they sped, mile after mile, with chat and laughter merry  He watched her dimpled, roguish smile and drove toward the ferry. Through lovely groves, where birds sang sweet their notes of joy so merry, Or partridge, hid in ripened wheat, whistled his &ldquo;Bob White&rdquo; cherry. Up the shell road and o'er the fields and by the moss-hung oaks. Where marshy land its rich grain yields or sad-voiced raven croaks. Then turning off the highway and past the gate of toll, Then up into a by-way which led straight to the knoll, &ldquo;'Tis here,&rdquo; said he &ldquo;the loveliest spot in all the world so wide, Swept by the breezes from the sea, and kissed by every tide. Come down beside the river's brink, where the water ripples merry  A lovely place to rest and think, down here beside the ferry.&rdquo; So taking his uplifted hands she gave a little bound, And very soon they sat them down upon the grassy ground. &ldquo;In days that are forever fled, when slavery cursed this nation, This land was owned by &ldquo;Clements&rdquo; and on his great plantation Were many slaves who daily tilled this soil, 'tho oft in pain  Their master's coffers must be filled from the fields of golden grain. They knew no rest who labored there, but worked from early light  They ploughed and hood and reaped and sowed, till the sun went down at night; Then to the river they would come all foot-sore, worn and weary, Hungry and faint to reach their home they crossed here at the ferry. One day, they heard a strange sweet voice, not such as wont to lead them; It made their burdened hearts rejoice, for 'twas the voice that freed them. And when the sun went down that night their shouts rose loud and merry  They crossed with footsteps swift and light the last time o'er this ferry. So here beside this river we have found a rustic seat&rdquo;  And still the water rippled on and winds blew soft and sweet  &ldquo;I've something else to tell you,&rdquo; and his laughing eyes were merry, He whispered something in her ear, but not about the ferry. The sun was shining in the west and back toward home they drove; Soft twilight had its shadows cast o'er field and &ldquo;knoll&rdquo; and grove  The &ldquo;ferry has another name, which lovers oft repeat, Instead of &lsquo;Clements' Ferry,&rsquo; it is now Sun Set Retreat.&rdquo;
My Maker shunneth me. Even as a wretch stricken with leprosy So hold I pestilent supremacy. Yea! He hath fled as far as the uttermost star, Beyond the unperturb&egrave;d fastnesses of night, And dreams that bastioned are By fretted towers of sleep that scare His light. Of wisdom writ, whereto My burdened feet may best withouten rue, I may not spell and I am sore to do. Yea! all seeing my Maker hath such dread, Even mine own self-love wists not but to fly To Him, and sore besped Leaves me, its captain, in such mutiny. Will, deemed incorporate, With me, hath flown ere love, to expiate Its sinful stay where he did habitate. Ah me! if they had left a sepulchre; But no the light hath changed not and in it Of its same colour stir Spirits I see not but phantasm'd feel to flit. Air legioned such stirreth, So that I seem to draw them with my breath. Ghouls that devour each joy they do to death. Strange glimmering griefs and sorrowing  silences, Bearing dead flowers unseen whose charnel  smell Great awe to my sense is Even in the rose time when all else is well. In my great loneliness, This haunted desolation's dire distress, I strove with April buds my thoughts to dress, Therewith to reach to joy through gay attire; But as I plucked came one of those pale griefs With mouth of parched desire And breathed upon the buds and charred the leaves.
When the March wind blew, my birth put you at peace. You lifted me to the window to see spring pouring onto each tree. &ldquo;I'll make you a boat with purple sails,&rdquo; you said, &ldquo;to catch yellow bass in the peach blossom current.&rdquo; In March you came home from the sea, and pulled out the chessboard before taking off your boots. You started well but always lost in the end. In my triumphant uproar you kept silent. Suddenly you pinched my nose till I cried. Laughing, you picked me up on your shoulders and walked out to see March wind pushing the horizon, waves upon waves like flocks of sheep napping with their heads in their necks. You pointed here and there, murmuring: the sea and sky gaze and roar at each other this is nature. I played with your deformed half ear. &ldquo;Daddy, you can hear me talking without the hearing aid, is it also nature?&rdquo; That year March was wet and muddy. You carried my luggage to the farm. I heard your sighs mingled with your breathing. When I asked you to rest and wipe your sweat, you gestured to me to listen to the rhythm of migrating birds returning south, the running of juice in old trees, and the new branches growing in their own directions. Before I could say good-bye, you left and never looked back. The day I brought you my first poem published in America, your arms were attached to I.V. bottles. I translated it word by word. Finally you forgave my betrayal of your purple boat. You were not disappointed that I didn't get rich from my poems. You told me to pour the glass of cognac back into the bottle. &ldquo;No more drinking or smoking,&rdquo; you announced, &ldquo;I'm learning English to sail on the American Pacific and pick magic herb among the Rocky Mountains.&rdquo;
Mine had the look of someone who slept in restaurant Dumpsters or in the lube pit of some garage. His hair a rat's nest, shirt and Levi's stiff with grease his work-smashed nails packed with dirt, his idiot face a drear, industrial gray ... But for the most part he kept himself invisible, preferring to look like nothing at all  a clump of winter darkness maybe stirring behind me in homeroom or that curious, watery shadow I'd catch odd moments wobbling between my lathe and the wall in machine shop impatient, bored waiting for my own long hair to catch in the face plate or for my own face in fact to vanish in a spray of blood  one of those dimwit accidents our teacher kept shouting about a thing he'd seen just happen to any number of jerks like us. And wincing through those lectures those litanies of shredded meat I'd hear, sometimes, that peculiar drawn-out sigh that meant perhaps to everyone but me, an ordinary bus or streetcar merely, disappearing back into the void of sad Hamtramck. But it was him, of course ... a yawn he'd practiced for eternity. And one sixth hour, in metal fitting where an oxygen tank exploded once I thought I heard him speak out loud: <> but whispering now, like acetylene hissing from my welding torch ... He knew it was simply a question of time, that my fate was sealed that soon enough I'd look like him or worse, like my uncle Freddy my hands all amputated nubs ... So why not blow the place up? It was something to think about as injuries popped and sparked with white-hot, angelic logic against my pulled-down visor.
He frightened me awaking with a scream. I held his hand, he slept, I could not sleep, I came outside the tent and was astounded: for in great heaven opposite the full moon downwheeling in the west into the sea  and all the western sea was ablaze  the Morning Star  baleful, I knew not what, and Saturn over him. There were too many lights in the night already too clear, and I was afraid. But I have made a fire and hot coffee and there is a rosy flush in the east. So always, Lord of Hosts, allay my horror if I do for myself, as I grow old and too wise, for it is unbearable but a man cannot be stupider than he is, he cannot not see that which he notices. Marked was I from a child who learned his lessons better than the other boys in grammar school, but I did not hope the lesson I would learn would be that men are screaming and it is hard to be happy.
The woods which give me their silence, their ancient Douglas firs and red cedars, their ferns, are not the wilderness. They're contained in the two-mile circumference of an almost-island, a park in city limits. Pleasure-boats crowd at weekends into the small bay. The veils hiding the mountain are not always natural cloud. Eagle and heron speak of solitude, but when you emerge from forest shade the downtown skyline rears up, phantasmagoric but near, across the water. Yet the woods, the lake, the great-winged birds, the vast mountain at the horizon, are Nature: metonymy of the spirit's understanding knows them to be a concentrate of all Thoreau or Wordsworth knew by that word, Nature: &lsquo;a never-failing principle of joy and purest passion.&rsquo; Thoreau's own pond was bounded by the railroad, punctuated by the &lsquo;telegraph trees&rsquo; and their Aeolian wires. All of my dread and all of my longing hope that Earth may outwit the huge stupidity of its humans, can find their signs and portents here, their recapitulations of joy and awe. This fine, incised two inches of goldsmith-work just drifted down, can speak as well for  and tree means depth of roots, uprisen height, outreaching branches. This musical speech of wavelets jounced against reeds as a boat's wake tardily reaches the shore, is  encircling the terrestrial globe which as a child I loved to spin slowly upon its creaking axis blue globe we have seen now, round, small as an apple, afloat in the wilderness we name so casually, as if we knew it or ever could know it, &lsquo;Space.&rsquo;
The mountains between our lands and the sea  This conjunction of mountains and sea and our lands  Have I stopped and thought of its point before? When I think of our lands I think of the house And the table that holds a platter of pears, Vermilion smeared over green, arranged for show. But this gross blue under rolling bronzes Belittles those carefully chosen daubs. Flashier fruits! A flip for the sun and moon, If they mean no more than that. But they do. And mountains and the sea do. And our lands. And the welter of frost and the fox cries do. Much more than that. Autumnal passages Are overhung by the shadows of the rocks And his nostrils blow out salt around each man.
quartermasters and filibusterers was the beginning of the new and all those who heark back to a better time ought to get out, they'll never make it Now this doesn't mean one has to put up with the present, clearly the successors of the quartermasters and the filibusters ain't anything, they're worse, they're out the other side, gone beyond. They make nothing, and much of it. They sell what you quickly can't make use of (a lady naked on a horse, a child making connections, a tree stripped of leaves will overcome the attention,leisure can't be filled with art Traffic managers have no desire
<>  Then, when I leave thee, is there nothing lost?  God knows, in your account and mine, the cost,  Tho' all of life must pay and life be long, Is not too much! yet day by day the strong  Monotony may blunt the edge of pain  And leave us joyless, till we wake again  To find our lives have done the Truth much wrong. Nay! for the present and ineffable flame  That kindles at the core of life, shall last  Beyond remembrance! Time shall never tame The Truth, but like a pillared watch-fire  It still shall cheer our pilgrimage and cast  New light to guide the quest of soul's desire!&rdquo;
It's no good scowling at your supper, Harri.  You'll still want to eat and drink. Since we let the milk boil in the fire  We must stand the stink. I know your madness, being trapped like this,  I know how you're hating me; But this growing weight in my body no hating  Can lessen, Harri. I know the women in the row here say  That's how a man will feel; His own dinner-plate will turn his stomach  Once he's had his meal; But Harri, you didn't feel this way  That night in the railway cutting, When we watched the lights of the trains go by  And you did your rutting. Your collar is too right, Harri,  Put it on the chimney shelf; Put it around the brass candlestick   And bear what you've brought yourself.
When the third son went out To seek his fortune, He sought his fortune, not himself. He knew he was The third son. But what his fortune was, In what journey, City, cave, woodland, racetrack, Air, Needed moving toward. Some, I have heard, stay home. It is the first and second Son. They ask, Who am I? Any answer they may get Is premature.
It's a loud darkness tonight, filled with the hard noise of breath after angry breath. I stare at the blank wall, dingy and lizard-green  it needs to be repainted some other colour, you say, off-white, yellow, anything but this green. I learned to stare at the walls in Maninagar in the summertime when the lizards come inside. Nights they lingered on the walls, followed thick insects across the ceiling while I squirmed in bed entwined with shadows of leaves and lizards. Their black eyes: round mustard seeds glistened. And I stared at them, felt them secretly snickering. I stared, trying not to blink, afraid they would plop in bed with me. Tonight when you look at me with your hard unblinking eyes, the noise of flies and mosquitoes gnaws through my ears. That's when my dreams become lizards: delicate feet walk up my neck over my forehead, through my hair, I can feel their long slender tails trail across my skin almost like those moist tendrils the wind blew across my face the other day. My dreams come and touch us, like soft paintbrushes thick with colour, like fingers wet with paint. And we can still finger paint, why not? Let's finger paint with all your tongues and lips and sperm across our hips.
<> And the wild sounds with wilder odors cope; Where over crouching sail and coiling rope, Lascar and Moor along the gangway run; Where stifled Thames spreads in the pallid sun, A hive of anarchy from slope to slope; Flag of my birth, my liberty, my hope, I see thee at the masthead, joyous one! O thou good guest! So oft as, young and warm, To the home-wind thy hoisted colors bound, Away, away from this too thoughtful ground, Sated with human trespass and despair, Thee only, from the desert, from the storm, A sick mind follows into Eden air.
Under the moon And the sweet-scented palms, It was summer, and soon You lay in my arms And murmured so gently those sweet foreign words. They sounded to me like the song of the birds ... <> I knew not the meaning, but I loved you the same. <> And I knew there was something stood in our way. Yes, something was wrong then, Between you and I, And oh, I could see From the look in your eye, That  Meant &lsquo;goodbye&rsquo;.
Here dock and tare. But there No flower. Here beggar-ticks, 'tis true; Here the rank-smelling Thorn-apple, and who Would plant this by his dwelling? Here every manner of weed To mock the faithful harrow: Thistles, that feed None but the finches; yarrow, Blue vervain, yellow charlock; here Bindweed, that chokes the struggling year; Broad plantain and narrow. But there no flower. The rye is vexed and thinned, The wheat comes limping home, By vetch and whiteweed harried, and the sandy bloom Of the sour-grass; here Dandelions, and the wind Will blow them everywhere. Save there. There No flower.
Supported by four lions' paws Into which a swan-necked Copper faucet drips Throughout the long night The grave deliberations Of phantom courts And hanging juries Over the fate of each drop In the half-light of The patiently scoured enamel  Long pauses In which to plumb Lengths and depths To imagine the next drop's Convolutions The long-held-out cry of its name  Sight of its shirt-tails As it proceeds Breakneck Into the swill
is quite impossible to describe with accuracy but let me jot down a few random notes about her (char- acteristics that I have now and then observed)first when it rains she doesn't meltsecond by powers of concentration alone she is able in an instant to change the color of her hairthirdly when she walks past Southwark Cathedral those an- cient bells ring out in salutation untouched by the sexton's hand if you will imagine a female Rim- baud it is she (but without his questionable habits)don't smile I swear there really is such a person impermeable impenetrable and immutable oh I know her well.
Line of brow, purst mouth blue straight seamless snapless dress O!cunt that which you suck in- to yourself, that you hold there, hover over, excellent emptiness your whole flesh is wrappt around, the hollow you bear to bear, shows its power and place in the grace of your glance
The upper corner   probably battered concrete   from which it all depends, is a comfort by being in a form of order, and boundless terror through being inscrutable beyond the top of an upright and the beginnings of a cross-beam somewhere in the sky. Whatever it is that takes this corner as given is infinitely flickering and free, being shreds of primeval dawn sky, patterned by the moving parchment-coloured twists and tatters of a square-rig sail; blazons and insignia are breaking away at speed and reforming differently, as is peeled skin picked at by curious hands made in a painted-wood-sculpture style that seems alien, even when they're gone.
Upon the mountain Aten spoke and set the spirit moving in the Pharaoh's heart: O Lord of every land shining forth for all: Aten multi-single like the sun reflecting Him by Him reflected. Anubis howled. The royal prophet reeled under the dazzling weight of vision, exalted maddened? the spirit moving in his heart: Aten Jahveh Allah God.
He is not here, the old sun, As absent as if we were asleep. The field is frozen. The leaves are dry. Bad is final in this light. In this bleak air the broken stalks Have arms without hands. They have trunks Without legs or, for that, without heads. They have heads in which a captive cry Is merely the moving of a tongue. Snow sparkles like eyesight falling to earth, Like seeing fallen brightly away. The leaves hop, scraping on the ground. It is deep January. The sky is hard. The stalks are firmly rooted in ice. It is in this solitude, a syllable, Out of these gawky flitterings, Intones its single emptiness, The savagest hollow of winter-sound. It is here, in this bad, that we reach The last purity of the knowledge of good. The crow looks rusty as he rises up. Bright is the malice in his eye ... One joins him there for company, But at a distance, in another tree.
America is like Russia. Acis and Galatea sit by the lake. We have the proletariat too. Acis and Galatea sit by the lake. Versilov wore a hair shirt and dreamed of classical pictures. The alleys, the dye works, Mill Street in the smoke, melancholy of the bars, the sadness of long highways, negroes climbing around the rusted iron by the river, the bathing pool hidden behind the silk factory fed by its drainage pipes; all the pictures we carry in our mind images of the thirties, depression and class consciousness transfigured above politics filled with fire with the appearance of God.
Fear of falling is why the old men walk with their eyes on the ground, fear of stumbling into some empty grave or other. Thus bumbling downstairs this morning, with a great block of sleep still in my head and my eyes peering into the shady recesses to find what toys and books lay under my tread, with the low noise of eternity in my ears, unsteadily, fearing the worst and blind as usual, I passed right by the sign that Kate had taped inside the front door saying, &ldquo;I love you, Hayden&rdquo; in blunt bright lettering as if I would never die. Never's too long a time, dear little Kate, but if you forgive me, today won't be too late.
I have known villages grow suddenly from dust and stand upright in the air with comfortable homes grouped round a spire; and in the fields strong women bending down to coarse toil to nourish unborn women. Whilst in close gardens, languid with flowers&rsquo; fragrance, girls linger on close lawns for unknown happenings, tearing a petal in long shining fingers. So waiting till plum blossom, apple blossom, and white pear blossom are fallen down to earth, and the white moon fallen. Then a heap of dust that once was named, loved, and familiar lies unsubstantial in the eternal sunlight.     Whence faint thoughts, stirring far down in twilight consciousness, move dark-boughed yew-trees over graves and stars.
Little Red Riding Dick <> loops through the woods <> <> <> dear old Grandma Dick <> who turns into <> Big Bad Trick Dick <> who quickly wolfs down the protest marchers and turns back into <> dear old Grandma Dick <> and dear Little Riding <> the protest marchers the protest marchers mass in the streets <> and the protest marchers disperse the protest marchers
Retired as Happiness, that holds The memory of a grief that's gone, The old house, like a man who folds His arms and faces toward the dawn, Stands there. Above it shines the star Of twilight; and around its gate Crowd many dreams, that naught may bar, And memories no time can mar, That our home-coming seem to wait. All is at peace. The land around Seems dreaming of divinities That once in childhood here we found; Or listening for the mysteries That whispered to our innocence, Of that which held a flower in thought, Or of a tree's experience, Or of the wind in evidence Of dreams with which our minds were fraught.
The priest picks his way Through the parish. Eyes watch him From windows, from the farms; Hearts wanting him to come near. The flesh rejects him. Women, pouring from the black kettle, Stir up the whirling tea-grounds Of their thoughts; offer him a dark Filling in their smiling sandwich. Priests have a long way to go. The people wait for them to come To them over the broken glass Of their vows, making them pay With their sweat's coinage for their correction. He goes up a green lane Through growing birches; lambs cushion His vision. He comes slowly down In the dark, feeling the cross warp In his hands; hanging on it his thought's icicles. &lsquo;Crippled soul&rsquo;, do you say? looking at him From the mind's height; &lsquo;limping through life On his prayers. There are other people In the world, sitting at table Contented, though the broken body And the shed blood are not on the menu&rsquo;. &lsquo;Let it be so&rsquo;, I say. &lsquo;Amen and amen&rsquo;.
I've never praised you in my poems, and what I have written will bring you little glory. But frankly, those who wave the flag are scary. And what is to praise? Here, in your most anarchic of cities, a stony landscape where it's just possible for my kind to survive, I have planted myself like a tree, whose branches are filled with the cries of suffocating birds. But if I don't sing your praises, you obviously don't need me either, and I admit my gifts are modest. Still, the lucky ones you reward seem even less gifted though good at playing the literary/ political game. You prefer them boring, and tame. You don't take any more notice of me than you do of the poor collapsed on the sidewalks. Poetry is not supposed to mention them, or the leaders who live in luxury and blame the poor for being poor. Poetry, your literary critics agree, is supposed to be about language. So I'm out of luck  my poems are about people. For me, the whole purpose of poetry these days is to point out the stoniness of your soul, especially since you sing your own praises plenty. Still, indifferent to me as you are, here is my life offering, my poetry, that in another country, another time, would probably get me thrown into jail, so I have to thank you, after all, for neglect, for obscurity.
&lsquo;All that I see is framed On this one card. A reaper, Bent, his gleaming blade unswung And the grain like hair in the wind Rippling, bent Motionless, for the wind that moves it Does not move. The sun, Yes, the sun burns An eyehole in metallic blue, Pours a tunnel of shade Beneath a foreground tree. There The thighs, breasts, Shoulders, face of a girl gleam As though by moonlight And the tree bursts Into flower, the pattern Of the petals intricate As birdsong and her white Arms reaching, reaching out ... The slant Horizon hangs Above you curtaining a throne-room Where the Queen of Hearts Holds in her fierce grip A sceptre like a sword. On this bloodblack card The silence Swells with her exultance, Her exactions!&rsquo;
Wistful, they speak of satis- faction, love and divers other things. It comforts, it surprises them, the old remembrances, like hands to hold them safe and warm. So must it be, then, some god looks truly down upon them.
<> Of all alive shall ever know, She wears a proud humility For what it was that willed it so,  That her degree should be so great Among the favored of the Lord That she may scarcely bear the weight Of her bewildering reward. As one apart, immune, alone, Or featured for the shining ones, And like to none that she has known Of other women's other sons,  The firm fruition of her need, He shines anointed: and he blurs Her vision, till it seems indeed A sacrilege to call him hers. She fears a little for so much Of what is best, and hardly dares To think of him as one to touch With aches, indignities, and cares; She sees him rather at the goal, Still shining; and her dream foretells The proper shining of a soul Where nothing ordinary dwells. Perchance a canvass of the town Would find him far from flags and shouts, And leave him only the renown Of many smiles and many doubts; Perchance the crude and common tongue Would havoc strangely with his worth; But she, with innocence unwrung, Would read his name around the earth. And others, knowing how this youth Would shine, if love could make him great, When caught and tortured for the truth Would only writhe and hesitate; While she, arranging for his days What centuries could not fulfill, Transmutes him with her faith and praise, And has him shining where she will. She crowns him with her gratefulness, And says again that life is good; And should the gift of God be less In him than in her motherhood, His fame, though vague, will not be small, As upward through her dream he fares, Half clouded with a crimson fall Of roses thrown on marble stairs.
Somewhere beyond the thin lighthouse wall I can feel him pulling me; hard tug of a net. I can see his face, laughing and wet, rising out of the waves, the cold Atlantic sea, that holiday. That was some holiday: sex maybe three, four times a day. He's urging me on why wait, why bother hanging on My body is cold. I call my nurse all the time. I have a thing that I squeeze and it bleeps him. He has a nice little bottom. I'd love to pinch it. In the hours when I am lucid I am so aware of my body shrinking. I imagine I might just disappear into the white cotton. I hold onto the hands of friends. They start to merge together In the hours what kind of hours would you call these? More like years, epochs, centuries one day and a split second blink if you miss it another day. I try and follow the clock on the wall. The little hand. The big hand. It's all pointless. I take my glasses off. I put my glasses on. On and off on and off off and the hands still the same time. Today I'm having a blood transfusion. I am cold. I ask the nurse for another blanket. He tells me I am warm. I don't argue anymore. I haven't got what? strength or time. I hate this though self-pity: I wrap it round myself like a velvet cloak or mist from the sea; which sea would that be? The Black Sea. The Red Sea. The North Sea. I am running somewhere by the Baltic Sea; my body is strong and fit. There is a space I can fall into. There he is. His floral trunks. His forest legs. It is quiet. I am full of awe. I kiss the salt from his shoulders. He is rock hard. The long long stretch of white sand is empty. The wind whips. At last, I know this hand.
This will be answered. The tears were not answered but this will be answered. The tears of Madrid, of Barcelona, Valencia  The tears were not answered. The blood of Guernica, Badajoz, Almer&iacute;a  The blood was not answered. The tears are dry on the faces. The blood is dry on the sand. The tears were not answered: the blood was not answered. This will be answered. Because the men of Guemica do not speak, Because the children of Almer&iacute;a are silent, Because the women of Badajoz are dumb, Are dumb, they have no voices, no voices, Their throats are stopped with the sand of that place, They do not speak, they will never speak, and the children, The children of Almer&iacute;a, they are still, They do not move, they will never move, those children: Their bodies are broken, their bones are broken, their mouths are  Because they are dead, are dumb, because they are speechless, Do not believe, Do not believe the answer will not come. Do not believe Because the blood has not been answered The lie will not be answered. Do not believe Because the tears have not been answered The lie will not be answered. Do not believe it. This will be answered. This will be answered with Time. There is time. The dead have time in those cities In Badajoz, in Guernica, Almer&iacute;a. They can wait: they have much time. There is time. They can wait.
So I've become at last nothing but this, a pressed-out essence, a soliloquy. I wish I could stop fainting off, think clearly. I've bled so much I must be really weak. The same old chair I'm strapped to, same tiled walls clean as a dairy, TV eye, tapes running. That bright hard awful awful light no, a little hysteria's what they want, the light's no worse, just bad, like the bleeding, no more than what must be put up with, think of people brought in from accidents, air-raids, bearing light and the knife and immobility, washed out of consciousness. I can't survive. I know that, since interrogation stopped. Before I die they want my voice, in dreams, in pain, in sweat, the last capitulation of the body, they're waiting for it, but I am going to be awake to the end, as something cool visits my brow, my eyes, like my wife's hand when I was in that fever, you said you'd bring a compress but I clutched your hand like dear life, and it was dear life, till the sun burst through the bull's-eye panes where you were still asleep beside my bed. They think when I'm like this I'm breaking up and will soon talk about the organization. The tapes can gnash their teeth, but I sit here in a great calm with you whom I once lost through foolishness and now win back, my love, as if you knew I needed you to keep that mass of dreary stupid pain in chains tighter than any they could put on me. Stay with me till the reel is played, then go, go very fast into the angry shades.
Junk mail. A gun for a dollar. This one-dollar deal has changed the face of all I thought was mine, and it still cries from the enormous pain of being screwed inside my shoes, made to reside upright, both eyes directed into the heart of &ldquo;Daily News&rdquo; and snow will be here soon. The stamp stares me down with &ldquo;Man on the Moon.&rdquo; I smell the blades of cold travelling this side of mail without zip code, glued to the wide phantoms of cars going out of style. My snowed in prayers will relieve my heart of bombs and rifles. For a while
Where water springs, pools, waits Collection in a bucket In the late summer heat, Beech trees observe foresight Of autumn wrinkling their leaves. The cold will wither this Old garden. The plumpness shrinks Beneath its skin, a light Frown puckers the mirrored sky. The scythe bleeds ancient herbs Whose odours come as ghosts To disturb memory. My fire of nettles crackles Like bees creeping in a green Hive, making white smoke from weeds, And the strange, sweet plants Marged Sowed, or Nanu, before The wind changed from the east. With the reaping hook blade I lift an exhausted moth From the hot mound. It lives To die of cold. Inside the cave Of thatched grass the secret fire Thrives on my summer. Nettles Turn to ashes in its heart, Crucible of the fragrant and The sour. Only soil survives. Rose bay willowherb, ragwort, Grass, disintegrate and make A white continuous mane For the mountain. Ponies turn Windward. The evening's heat Belies the beech tree's shiver, And pinpoints of ice on skin Are nettlestings, not rain. Fire, Buried in flower-heads, makes Bright ritual of decay, Transubstantiates the green Leaf to fertility.
To be not jealous, give not love! Rate not thy fair all fair above, Or thou'lt be decked in green, the hue That jealousy is bounden to. That lily hand! Those lips of fire! Those dewy eyes that spill desire! Those mounds of lambent snow, may be Found anywhere it pleaseth thee To turn! Then turn, and be not mad Though all of loveliness she had:  She hath not  A store remains, wherewith to bless The bee, the bird, the butterfly, And thou! Go, search with those that fly For that, which thou shalt easy find On every path, and any wind! Nor dream that she be Seal and Star Who is but as her sisters are! And whose reply is, Yes and No, To all that come, and all that go.  I love! Then love again, my friend; Enjoy thy love, without an end!   I love ... Ah, cease! Know what is what, Thou dost not love, if she love not! For if thou truly lov&eacute;d her From thee away she could not stir! But ever at thy side, would be Thy self, and thy felicity! Go! Drape thee in the greeny hue! Thou art not Love! She is not True! And, no more need be said Adieu!
Sometimes I can almost get through the day without feeling it, without remembering, but it's maybe when I'm pouring coffee, the black flood in a rush from the spout as it swirls like blood in the empty white cup and the emptiness drains out of me. I feel my veins filling with nothing, my womb chills, and yearns, and I feel so faint I can scarcely stand with the pot in my hand, my head's light with streaks, specks in my eyes, I can't speak, I'm trying to rise from the bed, reaching toward the doctor, pleading &lsquo;Let me hold my baby!&rsquo; and there is no baby. Then I have to walk back to the kitchen as though nothing had happened to get the sugar and cream and I've never seen my baby. The hollow feeling in the pit of my stomach, it's like a stone fell leaving nothing but the way the weight of it was there, and then not there. When he ran off with Janeen I felt nothing, it was like I was so numb already there was nothing more I could feel. Like my arms and legs are straws, my body emptied into the light and I'm pleading, clutching armfuls of air, the doctor jabbing my thighs with needles, his voice coming at me from farther and farther away, the stupor blanketing me until I'm listening, listening in a dark silence for the sound of the baby's first cry when he holds it up and spanks it, hearing the echo of nothing. Just a moment, sir, I'll pour you another cup.
The weather's changing so chillies redden slowly. I do not expect them to ripen according to my program though I'm told this is my way. But a few warm days and you can be almost guaranteed to find them moving from state to state. A green chilli flatlining and finding the other side tolerable. Easter Friday. The heavy clouds are rolling in. They predicted that a week ago. Here, try a chilli they're deadly at this time of year  the pride of the garden corn long since finished, the last rays of summer spilling from overripe tomatoes, lettuces shaking their seedy arms, their heads embalmed about thickened stalks while chillies majestic daggers awaiting the sunlight, hone their skills in the weakening light.
<> What if we steal this city blind? If they want any thing let 'em nail it down. Harness bulls, dicks, front office men, And the high goats up on the bench, Ain't they all in cahoots? Ain't it fifty-fifty all down the line, Petemen, dips, boosters, stick-ups and guns  what's to hinder? Go fifty-fifty. If they nail you call in a mouthpiece. Fix it, you gazump, you slant-head, fix it. Feed 'em. ... Nothin' ever sticks to my fingers, nah, nah, nothin' like that, But there ain't no law we got to wear mittens  huh is there? Mittens, that's a good one mittens! There oughta be a law everybody wear mittens.
Go down (Forsaking the lagoons of bridged Atlantis) To the mid-Atlantic ridge where are the crazed Magnetic fields and roped sheets, and stains (The disordered fabric of the volcanic Bed chamber) and the gigantic vermicular Testimonies and stare upon the great Principle of the solid world the original Torment trace. Go down, for down is the way, And grapple one stone syllable Of all that frozen love's discourse Onto an iron dredge and on it rise (Borne on the enormous weight of its desire For light and the air) until it explodes Upon the deck amid the astonished crew. Then empty out the nets disposed about Your person, and fill them with the pieces Of that one vast syllable and carry them To Cahokia in East Saint Louis, where My father was born who is dying now (He was an honest man mute as stone) Place them on the top of Monk's Mound (Go you. I am his son. I have no words.) and let Them off like a siren.
Look round, brown moon, brown bird, as you rise to fly, Look round at the head and zither On the ground. Look round you as you start to rise, brown moon, At the book and shoe, the rotted rose At the door. This was the place to which you came last night, Flew close to, flew to without rising away. Now, again, In your light, the head is speaking. It reads the book. It becomes the scholar again, seeking celestial Rendezvous, Picking thin music on the rustiest string, Squeezing the reddest fragrance from the stump Of summer. The venerable song falls from your fiery wings. The song of the great space of your age pierces The fresh night.
I saw a great mouth in space that fifty thousand angels could not fill they ran shrieking from it as it grew and threw their coloured coats and flares for lures among the stars while it advanced and swallowed the planets of the sun one by one and then the sun it rose and swayed the Milky Way collapsed into it like a poorly shuffled pack deeper and deeper into darkness it brought darkness and what it blotted out it grew drunk on to grinning-point with so much fire in its belly it roared over its thankless hoard for that was the new horror to hear it when it howled like a hungry scraped womb and galaxies jampacked with glittering rayed-out million-year-old civilizations were jumped like a handful of asteroids and sucked into tales of hell for all they could tell the Plough long gone the winding Dragon the Lyre the Balance the fading Charioteer Aquarius with a loud cry Keel Stern and Sails in terrible rushing silence and now white Sirius was black yellow Capella was black red Antares was black and no lights ever came back heavens and paradises popped like seaweed eternal laws were never seen again angels' teeth were cosmic dust and cosmic dust was angels' teeth all's grist to that dark mill where christs and godbearers were pulped with their domes ikons vanes their scrolls aeons and reigns in Virgo the most evolved life there was was calm and watchful in its fiery coverts the mouth had long been computed probable and plans had been laid and re-laid the dense cluster of three thousand galaxies had made itself a force field that would not know how to yield the worlds of Virgo were not only inhabited but hyperinhabited they were all one life and their force field was themselves they were a wall they shone they stood jehovahs and elohim are daguerreotypes to their movies they made universes as poets make verses in Virgo they did not underestimate the mouth they were the last star-gate and goal when they saw there were no other lights in the recesses of space and it was hard to distinguish the shadow of the unsated mouth from the shadow of the dead but its lips were blackest red they gaped for Virgo with a scream they gaped for Virgo with a scream they gaped for Virgo with a scream they gaped for Virgo with a scream they gaped for Virgo with a scream they gaped at that great quiet gate
Chapel and bridge. A headlong fall into woods. A river running fast divides the wild cow parsley. &ldquo;My father lived here once,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;I think you knew him.&rdquo; The sun, hot at our backs, whitens the lane. She, in shadow, allows the sun to pass her into the passage. I gain entry at his name, tea, a lace cloth on the table. When talking is done she ruffles my son's brown hair with a hand that is bruised with age. Veins stand, fast water in her wrists. Handshakes, glances converging could not span such giddy water. Out in the lane the thrush outsings the river. The village is at lunch. The bridge burns with cow parsley. We stand in the brilliance without words, watch him running into the light. Should he turn now to wave and wait for me, where sunlight concentrates blindingly on the bridge, he'd see all this in sepia, hear footsteps not yet taken fade away.
Exhaustion among rocks in rockfall sun; thirst, and thick water to drink, the stranger said. And the mirages, the mirages  I knew what they were yet often changed my course and followed them. Less lonely, less lonely then, the stranger said.
The great gales rage in the trees outside the window.  The moon races over mottled water meadows and in shadows  and moonlight the surfaces  of the nightmare stream glint and shiver in the wind as winter  shrieks in the chimney stack and not even the far obedient star  believes it can ever bring  the summer back. The dog whimpers. A door slams. The shutters  clap and a sleeping child  stirs with a haunted sigh  as the storm mutters and groans around this dreaming and lonely  house. From tossing trees  the torn boughs hang swaying dislocated, and uneasily  the wood fire gutters  as hisses and spits  of rain sputter and drip  into tiny blazes. I watch  the year turning  and burning to ash  once more, once more and hear the breathtaking grave-haunting wolf  of death at the door.
Weena's distress at the mink farm's failure was taken out on the mink themselves. Their tenement, nicknamed Bagrovo, was assaulted in the middle of the night. Weena was dressed in the minimum of lambskin, spongy to the mouth I know, I know. She was inextinguishable in the moonlight, distracting even the slums with her gallows fantastic, her crushed roots. The mink sat around in the dimness of their old abbeys and amphitheaters, nibbling on white bread, feeling lavish and cordial toward one another: There was even a parrot to remind them of the costliness of a smuggler's boat. &ldquo;That don't faze me,&rdquo; said the elder spokesman, &ldquo;I paid more than that just to pee in some sinks.&rdquo; His Mrs. smelled familiar perfume: &ldquo;Shush,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;Hot Spice is coming.&rdquo; Weena flung open the door as if to a tropical brothel she was returning, a rictus of the oddest little doll sprang across her face. She touched her breasts, soft paps covered with fleas. Thunderclouds heaved some twigs out of place.
The verdure sleeps in winter, Awakes with April rain, The sun swings low 'tis night ascends, And lo! 'tis morn again: The world spins on triumphant Across a trackless sky, And man seeks evermore in vain The primal reason why. O whither are we rushing? And wherefrom were we torn? We breathe from out the silences, And breathless, back are borne. Deep in the soul are voices Returning this reply: It took a God to make us, Only God can answer why!
I don't think we shall any of us live as long as has she, we haven't the steady mind and strong heart  Wush a deen a daddy O There's whiskey in the jar! I wish you could have seen her yesterday with her red cheeks and snow-white hair so cheerful and contented  she was a picture  We sang hymns for her. She couldn't join us but when we had done she raised her hands and clapped them softly together. Then when I brought her her whiskey and water I said to her as we always do  Wush a deen a daddy O There's whiskey in the jar! She couldn't say the first part but she managed to repeat at the end  There's whiskey in the jar!
Two hands lie still, the hairy and the white, And soon down ladders of reflected light The sleepers climb in silence. Gradually They separate on paths of long ago, Each winding on his arm the unpleasant clew That leads, live as a nerve, to memory. But often when too steep her dream descends, Perhaps to the grotto where her father bends To pick her up, the husband wakes as though He had forgotten something in the house. Motionless he eyes the room that glows With the little animals of light that prowl This way and that. Soft are the beasts of light But softer still her hand that drifts so white Upon the whiteness. How like a water-plant It floats upon the black canal of sleep, Suspended upward from the distant deep In pure achievement of its lovely want! Quietly then he plucks it and it folds And is again a hand, small as a child's. He would revive it but it barely stirs And so he carries it off a little way And breaks it open gently. Now he can see The sweetness of the fruit, his hand eats hers.
<> I thought I knew its secrets through and through; Till an old man, whose young eyes lightened blue 'Neath his white hair, bent over me and moved His fingers up and down, and broke the wire To such a laddered music, rung on rung, As from the patriarch's pillow skyward sprung Crowded with wide-flung wings and feet of fire. O vibrant heart! so metely tuned and strung That any untaught hand can draw from thee One clear gold note that makes the tired years young  What of the time when Love had whispered me Where slept thy nodes, and my hand pausefully Gave to the dim harmonics voice and tongue?
We have not, up to now, known each other. The light jive and fly speech over public tables do not count for much. I look for you at your place, in the few books and bare walls, even listen for echoes of you in the music. I no- tice an old milk car- ton; I hear so much anonymous noise. You expend yourself  something within me and I pant beneath you, open, heaving. You withdraw; I close and stillness and breath, bodies burrowing into clamp sheets are the only sounds in the silence. Silence: Good jive, a light rap and fly speech over a public table.
Forty feet long sixty feet high hotel Covered with old gray fur buzzing flies Eye like mango flowing orange pus Ears Durga people vomiting in their sleep Got huge legs a dozen buses move inside Calcutta Swallowing mouthfuls of dead rats Mangy dogs bark out of a thousand breasts Garbage pouring from its ass behind alleys Always pissing yellow Hooghly water Bellybutton melted Chinatown brown puddles Coughing lungs Sound going down the sewer Nose smell a big gray Bidi Heart bumping and crashing over tramcar tracks Covered with a hat of cloudy iron Suffering water buffalo head lowered To pull the huge cart of year uphill
<> The opening of their current and what will be Their only hit, a ditty called &ldquo;Surfin' Bird,&rdquo; Though the band was formed in Shakopee, Minnesota, and the drummer confesses, sheepishly, He has never seen the ocean, or even The Great Salt Lake. Senator Humphrey Does his balding unctuous best with them, Stumping for next year's presidential bid. Should Kennedy choose not to run again, He'll be ready. And the cancer that will kill, Slowly, and in public, this smiling public man, Must already cruise his cells. They exchange signed photographs. &ldquo;What's a Surfin' Bird?&rdquo; he asks.
Cosy in their offices, though disobedient for tiny little moments before and after reminders and orders, him and him and her fax and xerox, apologise, want. One of three possible, capitalised oblongs of headline inhabit, noisily, fronts of good brains, and individually interest them, but, unmemorised, self-file backwards, a spiralling deck into a backdrop to be what was then. Meanwhile the royallest women and men, for a dutiful, obligatory wait-a-sec, occupy hearts and somewhere a single what-luck citizen, occupied, a day made. Guarded, walled, with one eye staring and blithe to the sniper's angle, the leader of all this, thick with truth, moves in his or her off-white infalli- bility, telling, with a home in the tele- vision, -phone-in, -printer, -graph, -communications industry. I bag my space in enormous hurtling hyphens zooming from A to B, nothing strange in the window, no mood, no sky, no question but dumb connection to C. The news is good. And the news is bad. And the truth is this. And the point is that. And the name, address, acts and salary appear and brighten, green from a tiny, odder-than-tiny, divide by a million, and that by a million, and that by another one, chip. And eyes, once alarmed with money, are amused by kindness, bothered with peace but have it, a calm superlative Z of hush and comfort, where what gets said is &lsquo;Sure&rsquo; &lsquo;Will do&rsquo; &lsquo;Leave it to us&rsquo;. But the cumulonimbus northern No greys and shudders. The western We slopes to a slicked-back, cream-edged sea and the Old are huge and long winds blow the Other, the Different, the Bright Unsure in, in its swing and accidental love before the viewer, the voter, the staff, it's the wild wine-offering good-time Or for the rest of this day, why not, and his friends freewheeling home, kind and unobeying in three o'clock rain, and the very trees swinging in time and indifference that means, that mends.
Old doors slanted over packing crates shelter the Scutzes' several frantic dogs pinioned on six-foot chains they haven't been loosed from since January of '91 when someone on skis crept up in snow fog and undid all of their catches in the night. Each of the Scutzes' dogs has a dish or plate to eat from, usually overturned in the dirt. What do they do for water? Pray for rain. What do they do for warmth? Remember when they lay in the litter together, a sweet jumble of laundry, spotted and stained. O we are smug in the face of the Scutzes, we who stroll past their domain, its aromas of ripe decay, its casual discards mottled with smut and pee. What do we neighbors do? Look the other way.
On that high plateau the respite of a rail fence. A Tyroler rinsed out buckets and went around his barn, eaving a small pasture, plank wall, and propped shovel imprinted with himself, their momentary disposer. I waited for him though I guessed he had gone in. A cleared space, but the eyes do not spread it, nor from a great height take in the emerald floor of the living, nor can it be crossed with an unbroken desire: again I felt a hospital waiting room in freefall, and a railway lobby across which that same plunge ... but then a mercy like the farmer gone away, to leave the green brink of the deep foreground giving onto the weathered treasury of the wall. And then I was following midfield grasses, where they parted over a mouse, hunched and busy. A hawk planed in, wingshadow went towards the creature and over it and in each of us grew larger, sharper, in the grass also more definite and between the blades deeply slowing, absorbing the shape still ungathered, through the soundless wink of judgment, into the shape of the gatherer. I have seen the height narrow to speeding yards, tarmac streaming through the single wingjut of shadow that straightened and firmed, ground about to claim us. Field and floor of the living that does not belong to us.
That's the down-town frieze, Principally the church steeple, A black line beside a white line; And the stack of the electric plant, A black line drawn on flat air. It is a morbid light In which they stand, Like an electric lamp On a page of Euclid. In this light a man is a result, A demonstration, and a woman, Without rose and without violet, The shadows that are absent from Euclid, Is not a woman for a man. The paper is whiter For these black lines. It glares beneath the webs Of wire, the designs of ink, The planes that ought to have genius, The volumes like marble ruins Outlined and having alphabetical Notations and footnotes. The paper is whiter. The men have no shadows And the women have only one side.
Each branching maple stands in a numb trance, A skeleton fine-drawn on solid air, No sound or motion ... summer's rippling dance Has been abstracted to this frozen stare Of black, and blue, and white. Until the wings, the wings alive, excite The marbled snows; and perpendiculars Of tree and shadow thrown across the light Are shivered by minute particulars. The opening phrase is there. A fugue of wings darts down through the still air, A dancing passage of staccato notes, Now up, now down, and glancing everywhere, Glissandos of black caps and neat white throats. Here come the chickadees! Parabolas fly through the static trees; They dart their pattern in like an assault On all defined and frozen boundaries. Their beat is off-beat. Chickadees exalt Erratic line, rebound, Hang upside down, play with the thread of sound, But cede to those blue bandits, the big jays, Who plummet down like daggers to the ground; The rhythm changes with their boisterous ways; They scream as they feed. Now finches flock down to the scattered seed, Disperse on the forsythia's light cage In rosy clusters, sumptuous indeed  With them, we come into a gentler passage. They form a quiet cloud Thick on the ground, and there in concert crowd. A nuthatch follows, he of modest mien And dangerous beak; the music grows too loud. The fugue is cluttered up. What we have seen, What we did hear is done. Until woodpeckers take it up, and drum The theme; finches fly up with jays; A whirling passage spirals the fugue home. Afterwards silence, silence thronged with praise Echoes and rounds the phrase.
It is hard to be a man Whose word is his bond In love with such a woman, When he builds on a promise She lightly let fall In carelessness of spirit. The more sternly he asks her To stand by that promise The faster she flies. But is it less hard To be born such a woman With wings like a falcon And in carelessness of spirit To love such a man?
By circumstances fed Which divide attention Among the living and the dead, Under the blooms of the blossoming sun, The gaze which is a tower towers Day and night, hour by hour, Critical of all and of one, Dissatisfied with every flower With all that's been done or undone, Converting every feature Into its own and unknown nature; So, once in the drugstore, Amid all the poppy, salve and ointment, I suddenly saw, estranged there, Beyond all disappointment, My own face in the mirror.
... It is colder now, there are many stars, we are drifting North by the Great Bear, the leaves are falling, The water is stone in the scooped rocks, to southward Red sun grey air: the crows are Slow on their crooked wings, the jays have left us: Long since we passed the flares of Orion. Each man believes in his heart he will die. Many have written last thoughts and last letters. None know if our deaths are now or forever: None know if this wandering earth will be found. We lie down and the snow covers our garments. I pray you, you (if any open this writing) Make in your mouths the words that were our names. I will tell you all we have learned, I will tell you everything: The earth is round, there are springs under the orchards, The loam cuts with a blunt knife, beware of Elms in thunder, the lights in the sky are stars  We think they do not see, we think also The trees do not know nor the leaves of the grasses hear us: The birds too are ignorant. Do not listen. Do not stand at dark in the open windows. We before you have heard this: they are voices: They are not words at all but the wind rising. Also none among us has seen God. (... We have thought often The flaws of sun in the late and driving weather Pointed to one tree but it was not so.) As for the nights I warn you the nights are dangerous: The wind changes at night and the dreams come. It is very cold, there are strange stars near Arcturus, Voices are crying an unknown name in the sky
Around, the stillness deepened; then the grain Went wild with wind; and every briery lane Was swept with dust; and then, tempestuous black, Hillward the tempest heaved a monster back, That on the thunder leaned as on a cane; And on huge shoulders bore a cloudy pack, That gullied gold from many a lightning crack: One great drop splashed and wrinkled down the pane, And then field, hill, and wood were lost in rain. At last, through clouds, as from a cavern hewn Into night's heart, the sun burst, angry roon; And every cedar, with its weight of wet, Against the sunset's fiery splendor set, Startled to beauty, seemed with rubies strewn: Then in drenched gardens, like sweet phantoms met, Dim odors rose of pink and mignonette; And in the east a confidence, that soon Grew to the calm assurance of the moon.
I knew I had to start somewhere so here I am with my postcard of Matisse's THE MOROCCANS for assurance and color although many would tell you it's a poor copy. But it's enough for me today and it's free and even though you can't see it believe me when I say it's harder to figure out than most guess; I personally believe and feel there is a gas station pump in this fragmented apartment of Matisse's and obviously feel it is a fragmented apartment in four or five parts and how a pump got there is beyond me. It is 1916 which is even more beyond. Another one he did I have and even sent some extras to friends; I forget the title but one detail is an unhappy boy at his piano lesson and part of his face is like the hatchet I once had in mind and put in a poem as a father's face many years before I ever looked much at Matisse. Which is maybe why it's a favorite although forgetful in particulars as favorites of mine are. Someone said in a book that most desire to eat can be solved by drinking water or other non-harmful beverages. Today when I was looking at my crooked teeth in two mirrors to see how crooked they look to everyone else I thought that the statement by that someone is one of the most ridiculous I have ever heard, and wanted to forget it before following it along. The sun keeps dripping behind clouds and light keeps changing. Betsy and Charlie get back from their honeymoon today. Five days. They were going to fish. It's time to write my brother the shadows are ripe yet I don't know what to say. I'm sure I hurt Bern by not stopping by after the wedding. I wonder if the earth will shake tonight. Where will the tremors be? Wonder what happened to the hatchet face I made for the father. I couldn't ever tell if it was tender, cruel or somewhere awful in between.
Sleep's huge soft instruments rustle Through the age-peaked houses Of men like snub-nosed knives of wool; And the rock's eyes grind against heaven; And the water burns; And the depths are kindled By what is the spirit of nations And the wide Tossing air's eyes that are looking. Unarmed, the cold priestess weaves The fish into the pattern of eagles; And the priestess shines The eyes of fish. Unfolding here In heaven O Touch the face! There is your Mother. The golden panther steps with his paws That are made of silence Down through the eyes of trees Into the earth. And this be the sign Of your death: that you have a love Less than the naked happenings.
Close your eyes, my love, let me make you blind;  They have taught you to see Only a mean arithmetic on the face of things, A cunning algebra in the faces of men,  And God like geometry Completing his circles, and working cleverly. I'll kiss you over the eyes till I kiss you blind;  If I can if any one could. Then perhaps in the dark you'll have got what you want to find. You've discovered so many bits, with your clever eyes,  And I'm a kaleidoscope That you shake and shake, and yet it won't come to your mind. Now stop carping at me. But God, how I hate you!  Do you fear I shall swindle you? Do you think if you take me, that that will abate you Somehow? so sad, so intrinsic, so spiritual, yet so cautious, you Must have me all in your will and your knowledge, and I  In knowledge must mate you.
To be alive then was to be aware how necessary prayer was and impossible. The philosophers had done their work well, demolishing proofs we never believed in. We were drifting in space- time, in touch with what we had left and could not return to. We rehearsed the excuses for the deficiencies of love's kingdom, avoiding our eyebeams. Beset, as we were, with science's signposts, we whimpered to no purpose that we were lost. We are here still. What is survival's relationship with meaning? The answer once was the bone's music at the lips of time. We are incinerating them both now in the mind's crematorium.
They characterize their lives, and I fill up with mine. Fill up with what I have, with what I see (or need. I make no distinction. As blind men cannot love too quiet beauty. These philosophers rein up their boats. Bring their gifts, weapons to my door. As if that, in itself, was courage, or counting science. The story is a long one. Why I am here like this. Why you should listen, now, so late, and weary at the night. Its heavy rain pushing the grass flat. It is here somewhere. It grows here. Answers. Questions. Noise as stiff as silence. Silver quiet beaten heavy under rains. So little of this we remember. So few portions of our lives, go on.
The skull of the old man wears a face that's a rose from the renewd Adam thrown. Slack undulations fall, radiant teachings from the gospel bone, fragrance folded upon fragrance, tone twisted within tone, of gold, cream, rose, blood, milk a ruddy paroxysm flowering from inertia. Sweet Marrow, it's the hidden urgency we beggd to sing to us that were a gathering of his children, bone of his bone. The pungent outflowing of dead mind goes toward a dry music, a sapless alert piping in which the stinksticks, a <> old man capering before his makers, stripd of idea. The Day is my Lord, the Night is my Lord. It's fear of the Lord that informs courage to dance.  the old capering papa sings, <> <> The old man is a cave of bones. The old lady's a cave of bones. Fear mixd with delight is glee- fully a chalky face with bloody redsmeard mouth (human eyes we almost recognize heads that are drums, fingers flutes)  sings the old destitute but he's no more than a figure cast away into an everlasting cartoon of fathers  <> <> <> love of the Night, love of the Day?
This man perceived that time could never catch The candle, where it flickered and declined. Each flying thought a second thought would snatch, Leaving the outline of the first behind; A certain aura from a blown-out match Was lost, then re-established in the mind. What, then, was constant? Still, beyond all doubt, All flames were gathered where the last burnt out. True for him also, certain notes would stay, The meaning of their own supreme desire Established perfect where they died away. Such music, not unlike that constant fire, Made Earth, as though a fountain were to play, Fresh for a thousand seasons, night and day.
Down Loudon lanes, with swinging reins,  And clash of spur and sabre, And bugling of the battle-horn, Six score and eight we rode that morn, Six score and eight of Southern born,  All tried in war's hot labor. Full in the sun, at Hamilton,  We met the South's invaders; Who, over fifteen hundred strong, 'Mid blazing homes had marched along All night, with Northern shout and song,  To crush the rebel raiders. Down Loudon lanes, with streaming manes,  We spurred in wild March weather; And all along our war-scarred way The graves of Southern heroes lay  Our guide-posts to revenge that day,  As we rode grim together. Old tales still tell some miracle  Of Saints in holy writing  But who shall say why hundreds fled Before the few that Mosby led, Unless it was that even the dead  Fought with us then when fighting. While Yankee cheers still stunned our ears,  Of troops at Harper's Ferry; While Sheridan led on his Huns, And Richmond rocked to roaring guns, We felt the South still had some sons  She would not scorn to bury.
come a little further why be afraid  here's the earliest star(have you a wish?) touch me, before we perish (believe that not anything which has ever been invented can spoil this or this instant) kiss me a little: the air darkens and is alive  o live with me in the fewness of these colours; alone who slightly always are beyond the reach of death and the English
Is this what you shy from, shakily circling As if on hot coals at its endarkened borders  Morning, alleged refuge, sanctuary, Stretching its cool hand away from you Into a universe of heartaches and storms Of icy black light? Insomnia's Dangerous creatures, emerging to steal From the dark closet of your unconscious Like so many forgotten friends, appear In your clothes, your shoes, studying to be you: Still, one thing, the blockade at the end Of the sordid street this nocturnal Habit of wooing ghosts has obscured from you All these years, is at last illuminated.
It is a warm winter this year. The snow comes down as rain and in your father's house butterflies hang from the walls. Scraps of pearskin lacquer laid thin across the cold of windows and the dark arms of furniture. Open a door and they shift and dither with the odd ends of paperchains. For twelve nights we have been drinking warm alcohol. Your father talks of snow leopards escaped from zoos. Uncle Joe's Minty Balls. Ice Fairs and the rising seas and winter butterflies. They have been salted away in hard chrysalids the shape of green almonds and now they are cracked open, the world outside is closed down under the rain. Nothing here is meant for them. A radio in the next room, half tuned in. A pendulum drowsing. Your father talking of last June in his whisky voice. The way light fell between two bridges on the Grand Union Canal, wedged into the green surface. As if the softness of light and the density of water had altered quietly as weather, green hardening into glass.
until and i heard a certain a bird i dreamed could sing but like nothing are the joys of his voice until and who came with a song like a dream of a bird with a song like not anything under skies over grass until and until into flame i can feel how the earth must fly if a truth is a cry of a whole of a soul until i awoke for the beautiful sake of a grave gay brave bright cry of alive with a trill like until
bang bang bang tara chi-tum tita  I am very old  I have to get up three times in the morning and sleep after lunch BANG BANG BANG TARA CHI-TUM TITA  I am so old  I am still paying off my danegeld at a poem a month VOTE VOTE VOTE FOR MR MANDRAKE (Scream) HE'S THE MAN TO SEE YOU THROUGH BANG BANG  I am extremely old  I remember when the coastlines on maps were completely different  I remember when Mars Bars were as big as sliced loaves. BANG BANG BANG TARA CHI-TUM TITA  I am so damned old and tired  With the sex war the class war the race war the war war BANG BANG BANG  I can remember nothing but war
After the lean road looping the narrow river At a break in the valley, turned northward up the coulee, Past the slow shallows where minnows, a tin flash Patterned the trellised shadow. Then, leaving behind the last trees, The spider sun laid on the hot face a tight miraculous web. Northward then. All afternoon beneath my feet the ground gave Uneven going. The colorless silence, unraveled by the flies, Stitched again by the locusts, was heard, was smelled  Swamp-smell, dead coulee water. And the easy hills Burnt brown, green, grass color went on through the afternoon, Then blue-gray in the blue shadow. The path went on. Darkness hid in the draws. I was soon surrounded. Only the wind sound now. All through the evening, Homeward I walk, hearing no human sound. The birds of darkness sang back every call.
<> Through paroxysms of fierce ecstasy And cruelest crucifixion; stormy child Cast by the Church upon the atrocious years; Untamed and best beloved daughter of God, Adorable in passion, grand in tears, Sublime in victory! how God must long To win you wholly who are so much His. For when you most rebel and mock the Cross You stretch yourself upon it for the world, And in our day you have made plain again The mystery of life sprung out of pain. Through you the miracle is still alive, Daughter of dreams, that nobly scorn the trust That other nations place in artifice, And from your ancient citadel of thought Survey without solicitude their power, Relying on the sovereignty of mind, Safe in the immortality of faiths.
Mama Remembers the four-leaf clover And the bright blue Irish sky. I Remember the East River Parkway And the tug boats passing by. I Remember Third Avenue And the el trains overhead, And our one window sill geranium Blooming red. Mama Remembers Ireland. All I remember is here  And it's dear! Papa Remembers Poland, Sleighs in the wintertime, Tall snow-covered fir trees, And faces frosty with rime. Papa Remembers pogroms And the ghetto's ugly days. I remember Vocational High, Park concerts, Theatre Guild plays. Papa Remembers Poland. All I remember is here  This house, This street, This city  And they're dear!
It has not rained for months. Hot dirt from the fields, hot dust whipped up with the wind hurts my throat, my chest  I can not breathe and then he comes with his clove of garlic, with his hot garlicky breath and his beard, sharper than thorns and his face of stone I can not breathe but he opens my mouth and then I must keep this clove of garlic inside where my flesh has become so raw that it burns It has not rained for months and I lie facing the window and I watch the crows peck at stolen seeds  I can not breathe and every morning he comes full of remorse with his hot garlicky breath he opens my mouth and then I must remove this clove of garlic from this burning flesh  and I think that if I would bleed at least the blood would heal me, at least the blood would soothe  the garlic scrubbed cuts. It has not rained for months. I am wet from my own sweat. Hot dirt from the fields stuck in my heart. Every month I bleed too much  too much and then he comes with his clove of garlic and then I must keep this clove of garlic deep inside me where it burns.
<>  The myriads and their monuments to dust!  How long the frailest, loveliest leaves have trust!  How long life urges in the reeking sod! The flower is witless of a master's rod,  The sunlight warms the unjust with the just,  The he-bird, joyous in his vernal lust,  Carols in native ignorance of God. And, when the travesty of God's control  And human reason leave us at the last  Naked before the all-receptive Soul, Incurious of the ends of life and death,  Numb with the monstrous effort of our past,  We pray the bird for joy, the flower for faith.
As winds bend grasses all one way  And take the fields with rout, Old memories swept my thoughts one day  And turned my life about. As roots, through leaves which drink the rain,  Divine the broken drought, My heart grew conscious through the brain Of sorrow gone, joy come again,  Anb hope's wild banners out. And on the road, the long-lost road,  I found my feet once more: 'T was night; and through the darkness glowed  Her window's starry core. Again it thundered in the hills,  As once it had before, When from the rose ran little rills, And we two 'mid the daffodils  First kissed outside her door. Now through the white wrack overhead  The round moon waded on, Like some dim woman, pale of tread,  Who by a dream is drawn. The night shook down its rainy hair  With fireflies jewelled wan; And through its fragrance, ever fair, Again she ran to greet me there,  As if I'd never gone. Again the honeysuckle scent  Of her sweet hair I breathed; Again to mine her lips were lent,  My arms about her wreathed: Again the night around us sighed,  And from its cloud unsheathed A star, as there I opened wide My heart to her, who laughed and cried,  And love's old answer breathed. Long had she waited; I delayed;  Until, as Heaven designed, Immediate, ardent, unafraid,  Her memory swept my mind: And with it need of home and love,  And all life holds in kind With man, to lift the soul above The years and give hearts hope enough  To do the work assigned.
Up in this warm, solid house of yours while you make breakfast I stand sighing at the window, breaths away from this working-class block where trash cans lined up in front of old buildings look natural with sun shining down on them If my heart seems to leap from my shirt away away away from this instant it's because the short drive in from Logan Airport thru last night's minute of neighborhood streetlight with children playing in it is whisking me back thru my decades again Way past dark we chased one another We had our own style of stickball too when the England you smiled in wasnt so new If my voice is quivering it's also because the sky up over your Boston Inner Harbor is too splendid to look at this morning  cool waters below, those barges so sober! Ive lived for so long now on another coast
Strange. The Silence of this nation is not strange. The President does not speak to me. A son breaks easy as a flower. (Lynched pistils, nectar spilled.) Where I step tears fall, turn to crystal at my feet, shiny like beads on a President's lady's shoes. Strange. No one cries with me but the ones who are me. Fields who understand the quiet of slaughter. Remember all my sons, my one or two daughters. Remember Devastation of a field of flowers. The President is on tv. His only words are: stop inflation (running away on blood- beaded slippers). No one speaks to me. On the absence of simple flowers in this house- hold.
She began coming to him on summer nights, and even that first time he knew there would be more not because she was Balkis (whispering the name), Queen of Sheba, but because he knew himself to be Solomon, and wise: she needed him! Like starlight she lay, radiant ... &ldquo;Her hair is soft, Th&eacute;ophile, and her voice so beautiful you will never understand a word she says.&rdquo; This he explained as he trembled back to truth; &ldquo;I see in the world only what already lives in my mind, but to see what inhabits his own mind, a man needs the world.&rdquo; Th&eacute;ophile understood: &ldquo;G&eacute;rard, you must get her back ...&rdquo; And into the East he vanished, for like all preternaturally real persons, his movements were those of a ghost  Lebanon, Egypt Sheba! and just as mysteriously reappeared ... He had lost her  &ldquo;G&eacute;rard, how did she look?&rdquo; &ldquo;Tiny hands and feet and a smile like a scalpel!&rdquo; So eager was he to possess he was made so happy by any sign of her fidelity that he must have felt something like pleasure even in a regularly recurring fever ... They found him black in the face, strangled by a corset-string he used to say was Mme de Maintenon's: he would take it out of his shirt and show it at parties. He was hanging from a rail in the Rue de la Vieille Lanterne, &ldquo;tenebrous, widowed, unconsoled.&rdquo; The air is no more than ink now in Paris all midsummer nights are dreams. Her hair was softer than starlight, and as bright.
Little metal symbols gambol in the bright pastures of the cases the world in sight for a moment, coincidences hinged together in a genuine plan, parts phalanged as finger joints, clasped and ringed in the jewelry display. Elsewhere someone's job is picking arms and fingers from war rubble, while we pick out our pins, one a cat's head  it doesn't look severed at all. Meant to be displayed with turquoise eyes that do not sob, chin a perfect end to its body ... Rubble searching for human debris is all our job, bent on recovering as we are, so in this case we see our hopes made gold facts. Beauty in a world sacked is whimsy's rearrangement of organs and limbs, all things in miniature akin: a frog's head, a dog's head, gemmed hearts chained to a pin.
Deep in that black water where you tossed a book of Byron, trout have read Don Juan and are fighting mad. Madness like the mushroom pushing rocks aside to rise is latent in your past. Despite the wealthy cabins, owls you spot are right for disapproving. You are right for loving birds with scowls. Only wars without a name have meaning. Byron died for nothing. What rare hawk reduces you to meat with perfect circles? How easily you draw him as a woman  coy lids fallen, head half turned away  &ldquo;You can't mean me.&rdquo; You know the problem. How to earn a talon. You earn yourself by showing birds a way to be afraid. I'm no stranger to the darker waters. True, they half disown me, but the stars are bound to stutter when the crappie ripe with gold assemble and you paint them. Not really well, but saying fish are birds and birds are stars and keep your head down. Don't think too much when young about the heavens. Byron must be rotting in the mud. I don't know what water does to paper, but it must be awful, like one human to another. You're a hawk's authority on what it takes to die and then recover.
The spirits have dispersed, the woods faded to grey from midnight blue leaving a powdery residue, night music fainter, frivolous gods withdrawing, cries of yin and yang, discords of the bionic young; cobwebs and insects, hares and deer, wild strawberries and eglantine, dawn silence of the biosphere, amid the branches a torn wing  what is this enchanted place? Not the strict groves of academe but an old thicket of lost time too cool for school, recovered space where the brain yields to nose and ear, folk remedy and herbal cure, old narratives of heart and hand, and a dazed donkey, starry-eyed, with pearls and honeysuckle crowned, beside her naked nibs is laid. Wild viruses, Elysian fields  our own planet lit by the fire of molten substance, constant flux, hot ice and acrobatic sex, the electric moth-touch of desire and a new vision, a new regime where the white blaze of physics yields to yellow moonlight, dance and dream induced by what mind-altering drug or rough-cast magic realism; till morning bright with ant and bug shines in a mist of glistening gism, shifting identities, mutant forms, angels evolved from snails and worms.
<>  And rattlesnake-weed make wild the place: You seem to feel that a Faun will steal  Or leap before your face. ... Is   Or the brook in its headlong race? Yellow puccoon and the blue-eyed grass,  And briars a riot of bloom: And now from the mass of that sassafras  What is it shakes perfume?  A Nymph, who has for her looking-glass  That pool in the mossy gloom? Mile on mile of the trees and vines,  And rock and fern and root: What is it pines where the wild-grape twines?  A dove? or Pan's own flute?  And there! what shines into rosy lines?  A flower? or Dryad's foot? White-plantain, bluet, and, golden-clear,  The crowfoot's earth-bound star: Now what draws near to the spirit ear?   A god? or a sunbeam-bar?  And what do we hear with a sense of fear?   Diana? or winds afar? If we but thought as the old Greeks thought,  And knew what the ancients knew, Then Beauty sought of the soul were caught  And breathed into being too; And out of naught were the real wrought,  And the dream of the world made true.
It says in the science section of the  last big hit was perhaps thirty million years ago) we may expect an obliterating collision with an asteroid from space at any time but as always our President is on top of the situationtwenty- four hours a day astronomers are scanning the heavens with their telescopes and in Montana three shifts of missile crews are on duty in their silo to fire off our biggest rocket to hit the intruderour scientists (the best in the world) have calcu- lated on their computers that at an altitude of 1000 miles a 300- megaton nuclear blast will de- flect an asteroid of up to 700 tons weight moving at the speed of lightenough to save the world.
Blue-eyed Oberon prances for joy in winter dusk, the stars are sparks from his deep, cold fur. Motifs of Samoyed song float forth from black lips. For my part I want the indoors, hot tea, cherry jam. Yet I linger: everything instant by instant intensifies, dusk darker, stars wilder. And Oberon, strange-eyed Oberon, meets my gaze in stillness and holds it before he dances homeward, dog and shaman.
O Nirvana Don't you wait for me I'm going with Ma&ntilde;ana She's the only girl for me. I don't want Miss America, I don't want Miss Paree, My girl is Miss Utopia, We're going steadily. I don't want the boss's daughter, She might be a wife-in-law, And say her father bought her A fortune-hunting bore! So get along Nirvana, I've fallen for Ma&ntilde;ana, She's my only marijuana She's the only bride for me. From here out to Montana From here to Caroline There's only one Ma&ntilde;ana, Ma&ntilde;ana shall be mine! I'm all through with plurality, I have a blind date with reality, We're going steadily: So get along Nirvana, My girl is sweet Ma&ntilde;ana She's the only hope for me. We live while we see the sun Where living and dreams are one. And living has taught me merely this: Man dreams the life that he is Until life's dream is undone. The king dreams that he is a king! ( Stop! stop! what a thing to say: Whether in earnest or in play ) And all the praise he receives Is written in the wind and the leaves, Or in frost streaked upon the pane Or in the dribbling of the rain; It is dust and not laurel or bay When death ends all in a breath: Where, then, is the pomp of a throne? It perishes sooner than the bone. In the other dream which is death Man dreams whatever he may be And no man knows his own dream: As I, too, dream and behold That I dream, dreaming that all pain Is a blessing disguised, and untold. What is life? A tale poorly told? What is life? Images which seem The reality at the end of a dream! The greatest of all good is small: The belief that life is a dream And that is all that it is: all!
 where a heavy woven-wire fence topped with jagged ends, encloses a long cinder-field by the river  A concrete disposal tank at one end, small wooden pit-covers scattered about above sewer intakes, most probably  Down the center's a service path graced on one side by a dandelion in bloom and a white butterfly  The sun parches still the parched grass. Along the fence, blocked from the water leans the washed-out street  Three cracked houses  a willow, two chickens, a small boy, with a home-made push cart, walking by, waving a whip  Gid ap! No other traffic or like to be. There to rest, to improvise and unbend! Through the fence beyond the field and shining water, 12 o'clock blows but nobody goes other than the kids from school
Modern? Of course:  and  long before  Though at ease with a keyboard, pen rather than piano is your chosen instrument, the writer's craft replacing performer's pyrotechnics in the study's sanctuary: a poet, substituting orchestra for typewriter. I wish I knew the language. Time has distilled these moments, has sanctified place and date: Los Angeles, '48, the point at which suffering and expertise intersect in a blues called  A secret, mysterious music of purity and uncanny classicism: it is clearer now because unrivalled and unsurpassed, distilled through a sense of time. During an alto solo at the Royal Festival Hall you stood up and blew your nose. The gesture was typical, the solo was very dull, and most of us got the point. So, typically, you find a perfect absurdity in the cracks between the keys; for reverence is no use to a music which rejects the gloss of solemnity. You managed paradox: out of certainty you brought the music of confusion. Through commitment you had seen that tone does not carry truth: one must travel in-between. There is no perfection here for each new cluster of notes diminishes certainty. One would not have guessed your creed could be so painfully wrought into such complexity.
Photos and clippings fade; no one can find a real signature of Rube Foster, who put together the Negro Leagues; efforts at why Josh Gibson died at thirty- five are even vaguer, his sleek strong body in the waves of San Juan the vintage year: 1934. Later, 72 home runs, the only ball over the third tier at Yankee Stadium for the games on off-days. No flicks of Gibson as a Globe- trotter, his golden gloves astride the mound captured, for real, with Curt Flood, eating steaks on a grill, in a parking lot in spring training. Reggie is a mask, astride a roadster, a paltry lid on a rainday with Vida Blue. Frank Robinson's loaded automatic put him under arrest; the flick of his headrag, a white mop, only shown in Cincinnati, eating Satchel's 45-lb. catfish, chasing &ldquo;Willmont&rdquo; Liquors, Inc. as endorsements in Brooklyn. The clippings of the rest of Negro America are full of glee; no ounce of bitterness, except for Jackie, who hit better than they thought, and was fast, stealing home in public, voting Republican, the whole Civil War on his back and pigeon-toes. On PBS the documentaries, one trailer sideshow, a whole hall of oral history in transcriptions of black and white. Trujillo, who paid the best, threatened execution if you lost; the black World Series in Comiskey full of chicken, zoot suits, trainfare from everywhere but endorsements, turnstyles. &ldquo;Let's play two.&rdquo;
Many of the images refuse to part, dictions of light still make up the light, the broken theories depart like the water, though the water did not depart: it is just waiting, sounding, turning. Maybe I am still deluding myself, like tearing up the pockets, crossing the white night with an endless face in front of me, a signpost from warning, and the list I would like to make of life, the blue and the green and the yellow, the illusion I could cite as the image, memory as all my own disillusion, the song's refrain, the song's shovel, the needing of the arm and the body beside me, the having you here, the management of the life: seems that life came between the life, at the ledge, at the window, at that single saying of the candle in the red night. Today I heard voices within the shovel, voices of chain, voices of listening. The light listed the sea as a separate voice, I could tell my part in the desert with any kind clarity, except that the desert held a sigh, held it long, and I waited in red night for your return. I waited in fear. I was embarassed, for I recalled how I had not gone there for years and years, how I had stopped where the water stopped, at the end, at the edge where the beginning and the end and my sight was a feeling for the call. Years pass. I don't solve anything. Someone breaks the images and they break again, I hear the identity of the song. The song is passing like a wave.
That summer, in a small glass booth, I sat and set strapless watches to within ten seconds of test time all day, as the women did all year. Fifty a tray times twenty trays whilst trying to chat to Joe Capitelli whose name kept sending me into a dreamtime of Dundee shopfronts: &lsquo;Grilli&rsquo;, &lsquo;Piscini&rsquo;, &lsquo;Vissocchi&rsquo;... an ice-cream float of mock-Italian: &lsquo;Scella da peas on da coontah ...&rsquo; here was another timelessness: red mock-leathery booths of the caf&eacute;s in Blairgowrie and the Ferry, yellow tartan formica of the chippers in Stobswell and Arbroath. The decor of my time machine was fixed on sub-Art Deco forever, binding me to Italy, binding the fifties to me on a waft of milk-froth and lard. Here I first perceived the rocket machinery of coffee-propulsion; the catholicity of a sugar-censer; the madonna of the knickerbocker glory. Here I first encountered the folded pizza supper that would translate as  in the Spanish chippie in Blackness, painted with tambourined dancers like some pan-European Eve and Adam: all these cleared me an hour from the cease- less grasping hands of the clock in which I could just sidle in to the black marbled cool dimness of Benni's on the corner of Corso Street and buy time back in sliders.
How could Prometheus, chained, and from the first Bound to the sufferer, aiding man with art, Loosening his children, learn a change of heart Where, in the Tyrant's eye, he stands accursed? By little footsteps, so mankind was nursed To live the eternal in a narrow part Of time, and rubbing sticks together, start The fire he stole, who gluts an eagle's thirst. Who sees him sees his valour and must mourn. Yet, if he take his confidence for pride, He cannot know true gold when it is tried, Nor read that compass holding time in scorn Which makes all terrors, if a god decide, To die upon the instant they are born.
More faithful than lover or husband it cleaves to you, calling itself by your name as if there had been a ceremony. At night, you turn and turn searching for the one bearable position, but though you may finally sleep it wakens ahead of you. How heavy it is, displacing with its volume your very breath. Before, you seemed to weigh nothing, your arms might have been wings. Now each finger adds its measure; you are pulled down by the weight of your own hair. And if your life should disappear ahead of you you would not run after it.
Aye you're a man that! ye old mesmerizer Tyin' your meanin' in seventy swadelin's, One must of needs be a hang'd early riser To catch you at worm turning. Holy Odd's bodykins! &ldquo;Cat's i' the water butt!&rdquo; Thought's in your verse-barrel, Tell us this thing rather, then we'll believe you, You, Master Bob Browning, spite your apparel Jump to your sense and give praise as we'd lief do. You wheeze as a head-cold long-tonsilled Calliope, But God! what a sight you ha' got o' our in'ards, Mad as a hatter but surely no Myope, Broad as all ocean and leanin' man-kin'ards. Heart that was big as the bowels of Vesuvius, Words that were wing'd as her sparks in eruption, Eagled and thundered as Jupiter Pluvius, Sound in your wind past all signs o' corruption. Here's to you, Old Hippety-Hop o' the accents, True to the Truth's sake and crafty dissector, You grabbed at the gold sure; had no need to pack cents Into your versicles. Clear sight's elector!
In the last field he would pause before the stile, Look back across the furrowed ploughland, know The lineaments of landscape as his own: Time-softened hillsides; fences overgrown; The muddy lower field; the lusher meadow; A dog-legged footpath limping mile on mile. And always, here, an image: one weekend, Home from school for half-term in November, He had surveyed this huddled group the spire, The farmhouse and the ragstone barns and higher, Held in the charcoal sky, a single ember, The swollen smouldering sun, poised to descend. He watched until the barns eclipsed it, then Stood motionless in gathered dusk and mist: Land taking texture from the ragstone walls, Hardening, darkening in the slow withdrawals Of colour, light, and clarity. At last, He turned towards his homeward path again. He crossed the stile and wandered on, his task To draw his mind from the encroaching land. The image lingered as it lingers still: Thus, following the dog's leg path downhill, I scan the ragged skyline as I stand Before the stile, forging a homeward mask.
Hoisting yourself From fingerniche to toehold, Approaching the Knife-Edge, A deep shagged ravine gapes on the one side, The eye of a blueberry-silver pool steep Down the dizzydrop other, Your breath short, Each rib rasping, Grasping the thinned air above the timberline, Clinging To the desolate rocks Below the snowline, You can believe As others have believed  This stony ridgepole bracing Heaven the longhouse of the mountain, Ktaadn. You breathe his breath. Hoisting yourself Atop the spined ridge you'll find On a slight plateau Stretching toward the peak's rise <> Beside a spring! you laugh at the surprise Of it and chew in the icy air Bursting berries big as birds' eggs, Your lips and tongue relish the purple  Then arise from feasting On silvery frosted fruit In the desolation To hoist yourself, From fingergrip to toehold Each breath grasping As high up as the mountain allows you.
Not the current century of hair; never the benighted tresses shorn by buyers in the little pueblos, smuggled north; nor of course the warehouse rooms of it, glazed pewter by Zyklon-B; nor my mother at St. Joseph's, &amp; the chemo's slow razoring, curls fallen, threshed; scalp left patched with a little down; &amp; not the lasering Vitalis stink on the fat mortician's hands, comb bestowing my father's final part, shellacking the wave in place, freezing the breaker; nor the yellow whorls, entessellated cunt still glistening in memory, our rented place in Kentish Town, street noise &amp; our cries still hovering, &amp; both of us alive. Never this, never this, never this. Instead a room in Rome or Hampstead where we stared upon the locket endlessly, enfoliated with the strands of Fanny's hair. Thirty-seven strands, for I have counted them, in the glass &amp; in the glass case for the glass. You were there with me. You were there with me, gazing on the locket. Then out to the drizzling Heath &amp; May the Twelfth, 1988, Whose century now is this? What home then did we make, what love? My face, my tongue that parts the secret mouth &amp; cry &amp; roil &amp; finger, clitoris read like braille, &amp; side by side then on our backs, swallowing the lucent thrall of air, a single wiry strand caught on my tongue, o glowing coal.
After a week at sea They wake, the boards are damp Easily rocking, sloped away From the sun. There sits our captain on the right Beginning the study of navigation With an astrolabe. A dark wall sways above, hides the rising sun, The height of noon. Upstage, long flat shadows like a railway station Where the others crouch stranded. Out of their stripe of darkness their quick breath Ruffles the sheer daylight, while They hatch small bundles towards angular death Backing the cool wall, and one, a girl, watches for fish In empty sea, crooning to the salt wave:  Water soaks in wood  You can sleep safe as  Bats in a tunnel  Water will reach you  You can curl up like  Cats on a mealbag  Your whiskers will soon  Begin to feel cold The polar stars have left our sky, Here in the lap of the wind it is cold: Not an island nor a rock to mar The slippery face of water  At evening a whine, high up, of branches; Flats of rain stretch out Diagonal between the grottoes and sidechapels of the air, The grey sea tilts at wind; ... And now far below the yellow sand revolves, Out corner is thick with a drift of brown beechleaves.
At the drive-in theatre where they sell junk on Sundays we saw a man and his wife standing by a pick-up truck trying to sell his anvil. It sat up in the truck's bed it was black, heavy, and elegant like a mammoth's tusk. And his name was written on it like a signature, in iron that once ran like ink. His name was Poe. I talked with him and he recalled briefly days when his anvil stood outside a shed, a workshop like a harbor set in a sea of green tomato fields, and inside he had a coal fire and a bellows and he watched the tractor replace mules and the car replace wagons. He tired of horse-shoes, wagonwheels and plows, of hitches, barrows, and lugs, of axles, crankcases and flywheels, and he sat somewhat amused (and dying, his wife told us), presiding over the sale of his own monument, which he wanted someone to go on hammering on, and in the midday city sun the theatre's white screen was blank like a faded quilt or Moby Dick's stretched skin.
All scripts were music to us who could not read, nor break the secrecy of instruments; all keyboards dummy, all codes mute barriers, so beautiful we camped outside your cities for centuries, besieging you and dissecting those who issued forth for traces of schematics. We mimicked what we could eavesdrop, no mynah more uncomprehending, no hound more lovestruck. We followed your engines through the ruins of our mothers' households, across the tufa that had been our fathers' fields until every nuance could be aped. By then the last of you had confessed the key to all you sang and said was long lost, and left us for silence.
A great light is the man who knows the woman he loves A great light is the woman who knows the man she loves And carries the light into room after room arousing The sleepers and looking hard into the face of each And then sends them asleep again with a kiss Or a whole night of love and goes on and on until The man and woman who carry the great lights of the Knowledge of the one lover enter the room toward which Their light is sent and fit the one and the other torch In a high candelabrum and there is such light That children leap up unless the sea swallow them In the crossing or hatred or war against which do not Pray only but be vigilant and set your hand to the work.
Ah, cannot the curled shoots of the larkspur that you loved so, Cannot the spiny poppy that no winter kills Instruct you how to return through the thawing ground and the thin snow Into this April sun that is driving the mist between the hills? A good friend to the monkshood in a time of need You were, and the lupine's friend as well; But I see the lupine lift the ground like a tough weed And the earth over the monkshood swell, And I fear that not a root in all this heaving sea Of land, has nudged you where you lie, has found Patience and time to direct you, numb and stupid as you still must be From your first winter underground.
&ldquo;There has to be a man or woman in the world Who is as old as the world,&rdquo; says the serious Man, prophetic swineherd. Perhaps a Jew!   Do not remember, and of the remembered And unremembered following the unremembered One to serve her vanity and her desire Who has been on the road with book and servant- Animals since the beginning of the world, Before the clocks and scales began to pass From heaven to heaven of the moon and sun And the pillar of light moved on the wall ....   And do not remember who is asleep In the root like a foot, and talking to him, The sailor wrecked upon our shore together With his parrot, his prophecy, and his treasure, Who has come and is yet to come. And being As I am a serious man, and patient, Above all a follower, a man of the hog, The dog, the labyrinth of earth, the nymph, And the weather I know that everything Speaks the living speak and the dead speak (&lsquo;Justice!&rsquo; they cry). And that the clocks and scales That pass from heaven to heaven keep the time Until the sailor comes ashore or the god Throws down his lightning to make an end. In the farm at the shore the voices of men And women at the last moment before death, Or punctually at the moment  Breath, congregate among prophetic animals (The hog, the crow, the dog) putting their questions. Their voices echo in the labyrinth. &lsquo;Which road?&rsquo; they ask. The animals reply, &lsquo;You must take the road assigned.&rsquo; They bark and caw, &lsquo;Walk  Swineherd! What, then, is the  &ldquo;In life you can lie down in any dark. But it is better if the bed be high And clean, and better if there is a window In the eastern wall. We sleep where we can (Says he) with eyes open, listening to the birds. But to awake entirely requires a bed- Place, and a winter dawn, the patience to lie Alone, and the luck of the sailor's song.&rdquo;
Son singin. fount some words/ Son singin in that other language talkin bout &ldquo;bay bee, why you leave me here,&rdquo; talkin bout &ldquo;up unner de sun cotton in my hand.&rdquo; Son singing, think he bad cause he can speak they language, talkin bout &ldquo;dark was the night the ocean deep white eyes cut through me made me weep.&rdquo; Son singin fount some words. Think he bad. Speak they language. 'sawright I say 'sawright wit me look like yeh, we gon be here a taste.
After the First Communion and the banquet of mangoes and bridal cake, the young daughters of the coffee merchant lay down for a long siesta, and their white dresses lay beside them in quietness and the white veils floated in their dreams as the flies buzzed. But as the afternoon burned to a close they rose and ran about the neighborhood among the halfbuilt villas alive, alive, kicking a basketball, wearing other new dresses, of bloodred velvet.
It's a funny thing, you know? Prospecting a lifetime long and finding out about the kind of gold there is still in the wilderness that no one can haul out by mule or truck or train or spend anywhere it is that men are spending, to have the knowledge of that lode by heart and know no human tongue to reveal it in. Lord, I've come too far by now to trust in maps for others and grown too worn, or nearly so, to make it by myself. Who could I tell?
Rejoicing because we had met again we rolled laughing over and over upon the big bed. The joy was not in a narrow sense erotic not narrow in any sense. It was that all impediments, every barrier, of history, of learn'd anxiety, wrong place and wrong time, had gone down, vanished. It was the joy of two rivers meeting in depths of the sea.
&ldquo;Coroner,&rdquo; make out this yellow sheet for an unknown name: in the marketplace the Mississippi in plaid scotch print rings under the eyes, the brow eaten from the outside. &ldquo;There's a man goin' 'round takin' names&rdquo; got yours, though you carry no words to identify what's torn even the lining of your throat in parts; children, near the trolley, on the cobblestones, fight the rats with baseball bats for exits and sewers; and on your workbench the ether of our scotch broth tasting of rat poison: &ldquo;Coroner, sign your name!&rdquo;
Happy, who like Ulysses or that lord  Who raped the fleece, returning full and sage, With usage and the world's wide reason stored,  With his own kin can taste the end of age. When shall I see, when shall I see, God knows!  My little village smoke; or pass the door, The old dear door of that unhappy house  Which is to me a kingdom and much more? Mightier to me the house my fathers made  Than your audacious heads, O Halls of Rome! More than immortal marbles undecayed,  The thin sad slates that cover up my home; More than your Tiber is my Loire to me,  Than Palatine my little Lyr&eacute; there; And more than all the winds of all the sea  The quiet kindness of the Angevin air.
Young Hawkins tells me that the ship is bottomless, but I haven't been below to check. We sent a man to the crow's nest a week ago, and he hasn't been back. This feels like a big ship. We seem to be stuck to the harbour walls. I don't think we're even floating. Maybe we are becalmed (this is my first voyage); how can we find Captain Kidd's gold if we do not move? Blind Pugh stands on the bridge holding an ear-trumpet, listening for treasure. This is my first voyage but I thought that, on a ship, there was at least the  of movement. I may be wrong. Tomorrow he opens the map.
It was good when you were here, I am lonely now. Nighttime is the worst when the light drops out of the sky and the colored fields that were company vanish. I dislike to go out into the dark open but in my empty house is the presence of your not-being, the speech we do not sound, the touch I cannot reach. Surely long ago I wrongly set out toward this familiar encounter with no one at all. During my prime years my country passed me by. I made do. (America alas has not made do.) God bless you who from time to time have brought me peace for a day and saved me from writing only prose while my hair turns gray and may to me God give the grace of the poor: to praise without a grudge the facts just as they are.
Now that winter is near ending, the land is seborrheic and great gray patches wander among deer trails, first light; the land trees take on a green-snake shimmer and one thinks spring comes from a destruction more awful, more artless than the strip- ping of leaves. It seems that beauty can offer its underside with more tenacity and invention: Indeed, beauty does well what beauty undoes: it knows what the eye does not it knows that the process is always the process of unbecoming: Soon something eye-green and pleasant will deliver us. Poems will flow; our minds will find encomiums, plaudits: But the greenest things, should you look, will not gladden. Already they are hinting onward: already declensions,involuntary prongs and mis-shapes suggest. And it is only we who fail to know that the bare tree stands tall
&ldquo;Yearning and dying&rdquo; those old songs in so many voices  so warm today, litter of sooted snow, salt-streaked pavements, some talk of seedlings for spring planting windowbox fuchsia. &ldquo;No paroxysm, inward,&rdquo; this practical love toward what unity? Meister Eckhart, you and your carolers make very little of the day's particles. Those shafts of light the soul is mirror to churn with dust and lint, are known by these only  no radiance,  The rich petals spread downward purple and red, flesh and vesture still.
To get the drift of this photo, Think of the relationship between the sax And the player's mouth as two halves Of an exclamation point! What I mean is Tonight, Dex means business. Ear mischief. Let's-tear-DOWN-the-house-and-nobody (ha!)-forced-you-(ha!)-to-come-here, DID they? Think of a warrior's Narrow sense of duty if you want to envision His dark suit, or the way a pool hustler Chalks his cue to understand the way Dex's Fingers adjust his mouthpiece. What I mean is, Dexter Gordon's about to take that DEEP breath, The kind Superman took when he was too lazy To waste muscle on the bad guys. A shock of wind, A  Whenever he'd choose.
David means beloved. Peter is a rock. They named me Linda which means beautiful in Spanish a language I never learned. Even naked we wear our names. In the end we leave them behind carved into desktops and gravestones, inscribed on the flyleaf of Bibles where on another page God names the generations of Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Homer cast a spell with names giving us the list of warriors and their ships I read my children to sleep by. There are as many names underfoot as leaves in October; they burn as briefly on the tongue, and their smoke could darken the morning sky to dusk. Remember the boy of seven who wandered the Holocaust alone and lost not his life but his name? Or the prince whose name was stolen with his kingdom? When I took my husband's name and fastened it to mine I was as changed as a child when the priest sprinkles it with water and the name that saves it a place in heaven. My grandfather gave me a name in Hebrew I never heard, but it died with him. If I had taken that name who would I be, and if he calls me now how will I know to answer?
The outside comes in to watch itself well, fuck it! The inside gets out. Goodbye. When will I have a shiny mind? A mind on which the balls can roll, and the trains. A mind in which the years leave tracks for some original suppleness to roll out of it like trains. Will they unearth the stations, clean up the plains? &ldquo;They&rdquo; go by silently and nothing, nothing is smooth, no, not when you stand sulking inside an out-of-season marigold and paw your reasons like an angry worm as the floors sway, pushed by remote control by the military. Nothing, nothing will ever stop because under us the soil boils with psychotic illusions!
<> the Woolworth Building and the Empire State (five-and-ten cathedral in baked lace; efficient dog-house for bitched Smiths) lies an Arcadia of steel, concrete, and grime whose shepherds sleep on shelves reached up stepladders perfumed with musk of immemorial urine, powdered with dust that daylight never sees. Here Centaurs trot, half men, half reputations;  martyrs to &ldquo;living,&rdquo; fooled by the feel of life. They would revisit the Sundays of their promise before they turned all-right-Nick, up-town thinkers. Half-arsed martyrs to the feel of thinking, Thracians, late of adolescent fermentation, less was their promise broken than the spell of half-formed thoughts put in three-quarter words. Do not, rheumatic Centaurs (while your nymphs preserve in alcohol schoolgirl complexions) print drink-plus conversation to restate three-quarter thought in hangover, the doom of citied Thracians, not (like their wine-god) twice born. Your words, sobered, turn blackboard diagrams, never to work the oracular change to deed. Centaurs abandoned! Nymphs who attend Cassandra!
It was in the cellar of the Edinburgh house owned by my great great grandfather that the bodysnatchers, Burke &amp; Hare, unknown to him, kept their cache of corpses in cold storage before delivering them to the School of Human Anatomy. There was always a skeleton in the closet, or a skull at least, perched among the army berets, the Luger, the greatcoat, the Zeiss binoculars and the fox stole with its red glass eyes and blackened lips which fastened with a snap. There was always the skull in the clothes cupboard with a fidgety script on its fontanel, saying nothing, its eyes reduced to zeroes. In today's newspaper I read of a Xhosa chief who believed his great great uncle's skull was kept somewhere in Scotland. After leaving several military museums empty-handed, he had a dream of a field and a white horse grazing. In the field a barn, in the barn that skull. And there it seems he found it  on a shelf among some tarnished bridles  identified by a bullet hole in the temple from a British rifle. So some day soon may we now expect a visit from a man with or without a leopardskin and flywhisk who has travelled across two continents to ask what we've kept all this time in our closet?
Before the break-up of my country I was content to lie under the kitchen sink and gnaw on busted pipes. There was a nest of mice with whom I could exchange recipes. When the military planes flew too low over my house I would stagger out into the yard and sprinkle Tabasco sauce on their dreamy vapor trails. My head was full of larks lost in a sing-along. A Snake person walked out of the forest and just stared at me. &ldquo;O Snake man,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;have you seen my little brother?&rdquo; &ldquo;My name,&rdquo; he finally replied, &ldquo;is Mr. Ashby. Please address me by that name or I will embarrass you by telling you a beautiful story.&rdquo; &ldquo;You'll always be Snake man to me, inclined though you may be to tell beautiful stories behind the guise of a pseudonym, because that's your nature. You are a wily apparition, no doubt, conjured by my own crumbling defenses.&rdquo; Mr. Ashby cleared his throat and smiled: &ldquo;Baby's tears began to flow from baby's blue eyes. The baby's slippers were starting to walk on their own. It was a false baby with false baby's breath....&rdquo; &ldquo;That would be my brother,&rdquo; I sighed. &ldquo;O thank you, thank you, thank you.&rdquo;
The name of this place Is the sound of the surge of the sea on its sands: The Peaceful Island we call it in English. Always fighting for peace, We felt that for once we ought to enjoy it. We left a maid, two cats, a dog, to hold the fort; A small unworried boat conveyed us here. The islanders' speech is soft and slow: No aids to their dialect have yet been printed; It sounds like the surge of the sea on powdery sands; It is empty of oaths. Now peace defines itself anew for us. How new! In the yielding curves of the closely wooded shore, In the pampas grass's hesitant gestures, In the sea that is ceaselessly giving and taking nothing at all. All this beauty would take our breath away, Had we any left. The man who brings our milk up from the village Pours it like a libation. On the brow Of the hill a goatherd greets us with a blessing. The buying of figs is a ceremony of gods. But yesterday I threw a stone at a brilliant bird, unthinkingly; Then thanked God trembling that it missed. All night the soft sea murmured to the gaping sand, Like streams of ink across a bottomless blotter. Dizzy with lack of sleep Today I throw stones at a row of empty bottles. One supplies waitresses to the city, another is a flinty industrialist, One represents an obscure and well-known poet, Another is expert in traditions and hopes for war. The noise of breaking glass attracts the peasants Who gather round, purring benignly in their dialect, Till I find I am throwing dangerously wide, and go inside  To wonder what can be happening back in the city, The buying and selling underneath the arches, The papers accumulating their puerilities, The charlatan voices like the surge of an endless sea ... So many people, waiting to be told about peace, So many skulls to drive it into. Setting up the not-too-broken bottles, I kill off the evening.  From behind a clump of ferns A goatherd watches, calmly. For he knows I know that the boat for the city calls in tomorrow.
Sedimentary silt's slow metamorphosis, mudstone to shale, then the squeeze of the giant's fist. Light fingers it with a shimmer like water on roofscape or slate tip. A rockface flickers in the wind as if it moved. Slate to sleep under, knowing its rain-blue gleam or the satin of moonlight. To walk on, cool underfoot, carrying a tray into the garden where once Nain stumped in her clogs, goosefeathers drifting the flags, and her bucket of water flung on the dairy floor ran the gutters blue with milk. Slabs to set jellies, cool curds and junkets, butter slapped to a pattern of oak leaves, a cheese to be turned, a beaded jug of milk. His lungs filled with sediment, invisible blues, purples, silty darknesses. Their branches brimmed with a shadow of stone till he couldn't walk, or breathe. They offered him a settlement of dust. So slow the strata, fossils and globules of oil trapped between pages, the laying down of the leaves of slate. Now, inside mountains, in the cathedrals of silence, streams break their beads into the dark, a fall of vertebrae too far down to hear. It begins again, a fall of earth. Between history's pages they will find the body of a man like a fern.
that comes to pieces in your hand like stale biscuit; birth book how many million years left out in the rain. Break back the pages, the flaking pages, to reveal our own hairline habitations, the airless museum in which we're still chained into that still ocean, while all this burly and stirring water  motion in monotonous repetition  washes with silt our Jurassic numbness, shelves of ourselves to which we will not return. Bedded in shale, in its negative evidence, this Venus shell is small as maybe she was. The fan-shaped tracery of vertical ridges could be fine-spread, radiant hair, or proof of what we take to be her temper: hot sluttishness loosened by accident into cold mudslide, preserving a hated symmetry, a hated elegance. There is so little sheltered, kept, little and frail, broken in excavation, half buried, half broken, poor real child in the boulder that finds the right shape of its mind only at the moment of disintegration. And yet, this clear cuneiform in rock, this sea urchin humping its flower under &lsquo;low flying phantoms' this flowing anemone.
The church of Vico-Morcote in the Canton Ticino with its apple blossoms is beautiful as anything I have ever seen in or out of Switzerland. The beauty of holiness the beauty of a man's anger reflecting his sex or a woman's either, mountainous, or a little stone church from a height or close to the camera the apple tree in blossom or the far lake below in the distance  are equal as they are unsurpassed. Peace after the event comes from their contemplation, a great peace. The sky is cut off, there is no horizon just the mountainside bordered by water on which tiny waves without passion unconcerned cover the invisible fish. And who but we are concerned with the beauty of apple blossoms  and a small church  on a promontory, an ancient church  by the look of its masonry  abandoned by a calm lake in the mountains where the sun shines of a springtime afternoon. Something has come to an end here, it has been accomplished.
<>  Majestic mistress of the yearning sea;  Moon of our young love's blinding ecstasy;  Moon of mused secrets that no tongue has told;  Moon of our first fine midnights, pure and cold, ...  When, with the stir of God's nativity  Within us, we discerned the Mystery  And guessed what death might give and life withhold! Moon of impassioned vigil in the high  Spacious tranquillities of earth and sky,  As, then, we saw thy light in darkness move Like guidance on the immeasurable seas,  So, now, we see the full-orbed moon of love  Move on the soul's more vast immensities! ...
Moon is setting over Great Dike, Lady and Herd Boy ford the high river  where is the lane not washed by havoc, where  is the one place? Streaming time, the ten cauldrons of the unborn are pouring their northern surf as we listen for  their boomings. Marsh tits harry the cygnets, I have dropped my scroll in shore eddies, come January my labors will  lock in the pond. Gull after gull breaks open white day, a girl, weeping, has turned into wing flash. Stroke your zither no more, Nomad Boy a bronze bell  hangs brooding in the cloud forest.
On Main one night when they sounded the chimes my father was ahead in shadow, my son behind coming into the streetlight, on each side a brother and a sister; and overhead the chimes went arching for the perfect sound. There was a one-stride god on Main that night, all walkers in a cloud. I saw pictures, windows taking shoppers where the city went, a great shield hammering out, my wife loving the stations on that shield and following into the shades calling back. I had not thought to know the hero quite so well. &ldquo;Aeneas!&rdquo; I cried, &ldquo;just man, defender!&rdquo; And our town burned and burned.
Where I've found myself, there I belong, a needy offspring of this indigent earth. The burden of pains and pleasures I've had since birth I've decided to accept as my sheer good luck. My earthen mother, green and all-enduring, I know your hands don't hold infinite riches. You want to feed all hungry mouths, but alas, so often you can't; and &lsquo;What, what can we eat?&rsquo;  your children cry, their faces pale and withered. Mother, I know your hands hold unfinished pleasures: whatever you shape and give us breaks into pieces. Death, omnivorous, pokes his fingers in every pie and all our hopes you can never satisfy, but that's no reason to forsake your warm breast!
Pictures and books went off ahead this morning:  The furniture is sold (and tells you so); Both trunks are packed, and seven suit-cases;  A cat glides petulantly to and fro,   Afraid to leave us. Now massive walls and stairs, for so long certain,  Retreat and fade like a mirage at sea; Your room and mine lose their established meanings   By dawn tomorrow let them cease to be   Or to concern us! We faced a scowl from window, door and fireplace,  Even in the kitchen, when we first were here; It cost us years of kindness to placate them.  But now each scowl resolves into a leer   With which to speed us. How dared we struggle with a house of phantoms,  Soaked in ill luck? And when we go away, Confess, can you and I be certain whether  The ghost of our unhappiness will stay   Or follow with us?
Adelaide Abner is cruel She is grown into a cruel beast She does not ask me to her parties now She wants to be first at the feast. But oh the parties were so beautiful And I did not monopolize the faces I was only happy to be delivered for a time From silence. Silence at depth is cold It is misty and full of pain And because of Adelaide Abner's cruelty I am in silence again. Then the girl knelt down and repented Of what she had said about Adelaide, Was I a true friend? she wondered, Yes, I was a true friend, she said. I was looking for a venial motive, Vanity might change like the weather, But oh her heart is cold And so it is goodbye for ever.
<> Or memory: the unclear desperate speech Burdens the darkness ... MacDonald, are you dreaming of New Jersey? Are you waking, Lampe, in the familiar room In your Missouri farmhouse, beginning the day As you know how to begin it? Are you going home, Kennedy, after the baseball game? Are you Opening a door, or closing one? Are you saying Something to the world, or to yourself, Burdening the darkness with this desperate speech That only the darkness, maybe, understands? Are you saying it over again, the remembered word Spoken in anger, in farewell? Are you taking it back? Are you saying now, finally, in the darkness, The word that waited to be said before And you forgot, or were afraid to say? Do you give it to the darkness now, to the face Moving away from you in memory Or in a dream? What do you cry now, sleeper, Burdening the darkness with the desperate muffled speech?
Birds fly down from the moon in white March (open sesame!) white &amp; unreal like a child on the prairie a flower (open sesame!) white in the forest a cherrytree's shadow. Frost on her feathers is white. Moon's also white, &amp; white kisses grow cold on the syrinx. Dead Leda, her flesh glowing white in the forest, &amp; Pan, sailing by in his boat. When it's night the blond swan, golden cygnus, throws open his wings. White's a conjure for clouds &amp; for mountains with the clouds on their shoulders. Stars are conjures for wings &amp; for snow where stars drop down from the clouds. Mountains are conjures for stars, for all white conjurations. Snow across the fields reveals the cock's crest. Stars still shine at dawn. The cock's crest suits him like a blouse. Stripped down he greets the day. A first laugh drives the stars away. His gold crest soon turns white.
The moon is in an ecstasy, It wanes not nor can grow. The heavens are in a mist of  love, And deepest knowledge know. What things in nature seem to  move Bear love as I bear love? And bear my pleasures so? The moon will fade when morn-  ing comes, The heavens will dream no more In our missed meetings are eyes  hard? What shadows fleck the door Averted, when we part? What  guard Scents death in each vain word? What haggard haunts the shore? I bear my love as streams that  bear The sky still flow or shake  Though deep within too far on  high. Light blossoms kiss and wake The waters sooner than the sky. And if they kiss and die! God made them frail to break.
Caught in the window breath of air lately on the big round wood table under the spruce, a level outside to work on &amp; let the air love me. The children of light summon this apparition, church in the world&point;church of the world, angel disguised as a spruce tree) Ralegh appears in the dusk, his queen a lost memory: &ldquo;I was kinder when I loved her &amp; sailed to the island for her, this spindle island half as big as the world. Tell her for me the years delight to pass &amp; the cool air of July is sweet under love's trees. On this big roll of parchment a map of these fields, thousands of miles, waters, &amp; on the little vellum folded in four my plan of the City we will one day begin to build her  the legend is in cipher to protect our studied proportions from foreign architects. The stone she sent me casts no shadow. Tell her for me in love's name we will go on trying forever, rising &amp; falling on the sweet wave of the work she gave us. Quincunx in the garden, a knot of simples round me as I write, I smell them around me all afternoon as I thank her for my death &amp; all the Last Things, tansy, campion, rue, basil, stavesacre, their air blows kindly through my house where in the evening fire I see the faces of all her lovers dancing with her, amiable, not too fast, &amp; therein even her particularity merges in all lovers whatsoever in that glowing white hot place below the flame in the heart of the incandescent wood where all the images stand still.&rdquo;
<> I went into a wood with two friends Whose differences and arguments were genuine. I had no idea what it was they were hunting. One shouted out that the trees were glowing; The other disagreed, insisting The world was dull yet. Between their arguments I wandered saying nothing; In my head some minor pain was growing. Aware now of the contradictions All blood inherits, Of the forces that through us were moving, Fifteen and uncertain I was smacked awake by loving. Standing in invisible fire I do not know what it was That set our heads alight, or why  Adventurous children, What did we hope to find, Not long before all directions vanished And the leaves, glowing with both frost and sunlight, Fell blindly about us?
The singing freshness of daffodils sits too light in the dark green vase, April looks real when it is slightly wilted the morning after. Wordsworth came on them by surprise and kept them in a glass memory. On the Co&ouml;s meadows along the Connecticut a week after haying the stubble is soft again. The misty evening is falling down from the big sky in big sections. My dog Daisy daintily puts her paws far afield into the crashing stillness where the mowers left an edge of stars  like the daffodils beside the lake he saw. Go tell Aunt Rhody, go tell Aunt Rhody, go tell Aunt Rhody the old gray goose is dead. I drove my wheel too far when I was a boy and I jerked off a couple of times too many. I once had an awful scare and I have been to San Diego. Oh the number of the speeches I have made is like the witch-grass in the garden and the press-conferences for peace have been almost as many as the wars. But now my stare is fixed, my blood congeals, he asks me for another essay on the schools, his letter flutters from my nerveless fingers. She died in the mill pond, she died in the mill pond, she died in the mill pond standing on her head.
I love you, great new Titan! Am I not you? Napoleon and Caesar Out of you grew. Out of unthinkable torture, Eyes kissed by death, Won back to the world again, Lost and won in a breath, Cruel men are made immortal, Out of your pain born. They have stolen the sun's power With their feet on your shoulders  worn. Let them shrink from your girth, That has outgrown the pallid days, When you slept like Circe's swine, Or a word in the brain's ways.
We used to say Meet you at The Green Hut, See you at the top of Low Row, by the third lamp post, him that works, lightheaded. We used to say I can't hear the motorway now, you get used to her, I can't hear the chips frying in The Green Hut like I used to. Open every teatime. We used to say Get off up to school, never mind staring out of the window, plenty of time for staring later. We used to say They need lights on that path, We used to say I like the lights on that path, we used to say the lights on that path are going to get broke. Meet you at The Green Hut. See you at the bottom of Top Row. We used to skip  Top Row, Low Row,  Mucky washing on show. Vests and white pants, flapping in the wind from Russia, lightheaded.
Skeins o geese write a word across the sky. A word struck lik a gong afore I wis born. The sky moves like cattle, lowin. I'm as empty as stane, as fields ploo'd but not sown, naked an blin as a stane. Blin tae the word, blin tae a' soon but geese ca'ing. Wire twists lik archaic script roon a gate. The barbs sign tae the wind as though it was deef. The word whustles ower high for ma senses. Awa. No lik the past which lies strewn aroun. Nor sudden death. No like a lover we'll ken an connect wi forever. The hem of its goin drags across the sky. Whit dae birds write on the dusk? A word niver spoken or read. The skeins turn hame, on the wind's dumb moan, a soun, maybe human, bereft.
&lsquo;come back in a million years they'll still be burning babies&rsquo; came back in a million years blue planet swirling under clouds we could see nothing &lsquo;the brown ones, and black, mostly, not the white&rsquo;  nothing below the thick pale clouds &lsquo;you can't see, send a probe&rsquo; so we launched a prob   never got there   others watching   even us / we can   hardly imagine   and the babies?
We should be hidden from their eyes, Being but holy shows And bodies broken like a thorn Whereon the bleak north blows, To think of buried Hector And that none living knows. The women take so little stock In what I do or say They'd sooner leave their cosseting To hear a jackass bray; My arms are like the twisted thorn And yet there beauty lay; The first of all the tribe lay there And did such pleasure take  She who had brought great Hector down And put all Troy to wreck  That she cried into this ear, &lsquo;Strike me if I shriek.&rsquo;
Wine steeped clouds ignite city's rim Bubbles float up to roof of mouth burst into clods spooning wooden crumbs from reptile reruns I ride notes down stick scratching dirt walls axis blurt and scrawny rabble watch indelible water seep through clocks
The wordwhirl stood high in my head so many years dustdevil-like it dominated the ridges and ranges of whatever else was there, so that now, the whirl worn low, wobbled diminished out of sight behind a stone, I think what has become of the way things were, the ridges empty, too.
<> Of the salt lagoon My true love passed me by Under the moon. She passed me by so close I could have touched her hand, I could have called her name, There on the sea sand. Sky blue her robe; It brushed my cloak of gray. We said not a word, With all the words to say. There we passed groping Where the water nears. Her eyes were blind with judgment, And mine with tears. There on the sea sand Of the salt lagoon My true love passed me by Under the moon.
I've fond anticipation of a day O'erfilled with pure diversion presently, For I must read a lady poesy The while we glide by many a leafy bay, Hid deep in rushes, where at random play The glossy black winged May-flies, or whence flee Hush-throated nestlings in alarm, Whom we have idly frighted with our boat's long sway. For, lest o'ersaddened by such woes as spring To rural peace from our meek onward trend, What else more fit? We'll draw the light latch-string And close the door of sense; then satiate wend, On poesy's transforming giant wing, To worlds afar whose fruits all anguish mend.
&lsquo;This will not do,&rsquo; he said, and thrust his left hand into the coals of the fire. &lsquo;This will not do ... &ldquo;if it offend thee&rdquo; ...&rsquo; he kneeled to thrust it deeper; he could not feel pain, But felt the darkness fill the room behind him. He had awaked from black sleep closed around him, And saw his left hand shine in sin: it had struck down someone, perhaps an enemy, perhaps a friend. &lsquo;&ldquo;If it offend thee ...&rdquo;&rsquo; That luminous face had disappeared, even the smile; the face was like his own. &lsquo;This will not do,&rsquo; he cried, and the charred fingers cracked between the coals; The right hand held the left arm firm: it was strange enough that he could feel no pain, Only the darkness in the night behind him: somewhere the enemy lay in the brushes, behind the night. It had been a cold room, but now warm, the fire glowing. He had slipped off his jacket before he slept And heat leaped in the shadows on floor, on ceiling. The fire opened its eyes into his eyes. &lsquo;This will not do ...&rsquo; unless he enter the fire to know the greater heat, the rise, the fall of flames. &lsquo;If I go maimed,&rsquo; he thought, &lsquo;I have struck it off; I shall not be utterly dead, but living like A living shade within the fire: damned, but alive in the heart of the fire, to destroy the hand to make Myself alive to live forever within the flames. There,&rsquo; he withdrew the hand. It was nearly gone, but flesh remained; It would not utterly disappear: &lsquo;This will not do,&rsquo; he said. He had best go out. The room was cold and pain began. He covered his left shoulder with a jacket; the hand was hidden, black as a snake, beneath it. He would ride  If he could walk from the door down to the street through elm- tossed Cambridge to an all-night clinic, He would look like a soldier, drunk, in need of repair and a last straight drink. And the hand? Even if struck off, what had been a hand would wear a glove. It would conceal a finger pointed at dark earth, At earth, not fire, and it would say, &lsquo;This will not do.&rsquo;
How calm the torso of a woman, like a naked statue... her right leg painted blue, her left leg colored saffron. In an alcove... The window yields a view of earth, yellow fields. Objects that you may hold loom large: a wine glass, a shaving brush. The furniture in the room is small: a bed, a closet with mirrors... in the room without walls in the sky full of clouds. The sphere, colored orange, floating in space has a face with fixed brown eyes. Below the sphere, a shirt with a tie in a dark, formal suit stands facing you, close to the parapet on the edge of the canyon.
For Shri Hariji, Who Said It Whether you believe or not Think as if you do. Stop the blind effort, Ask yourself what you need. Success at the moment Is not in your interest. Turn to silence, nothingness. Where you are Is where you have to be. Know, you are not wise: This is difficult. Grasp your folly And you grasp your self. What you have eaten Is merely unripe fruit. So, now, learn to fast. Do without, be absent, Keep the yes closed. Keep the mind steady. What you will see You will also understand. No visions, except in darkness. Listen to the voice That is not your own, Then move again Without remorse or guilt. Love is more concerned About your fate Than you have ever been. That is why you have survived. Express your gratitude By giving what you have to give. You may get nothing in return. And bear your restlessness with grace.
I thirst for the Kool-Aid of your fabulous fine fruit-flavored throat Lick that ebony tongue out at me and let that licorice divine heavenly lickrish slide down my system Chocolate mama,  Beauty is to boodie as class struggle is to ass struggle so let's git it on for the night is long When you place your hot dark arm cross my chest I'm like some fierce tribal warrior ready to git down to natural bizness With my head held high I walk through the sky with its cornrow of stars and you scroonched all up next to me sweet as you are I'm the original poet (and I damn well know it) when you suckle me, you stallion you Black woman my African Queen for more than a day kiss me with your Congo lips
Sarajevo glowing white as a translucent china cup Sarajevo forty poets in suits on an official platform Reciting eight lines each under a giant portrait of Tito Sarajevo my daughter aged eight laughing As she stands in the concrete rain-filled Footsteps of the assassin Sarajevo in the smoky little orchards on the hills Families sitting under gentle-eyed blossoms Enjoying their slow dinners Sarajevo and my brave schoolmaster friend Who did not blink when the bureaucrats spat in his eye Sarajevo I wish you no bombs no shells no guns I wish you smoky little orchards and glowing poets And soldiers who refuse to kill And children who refuse to kill And Sarajevo Glowing white As a translucent china cup
<> And looks too long, The red of evening full upon his face, Breathing a song Too sorrowful for any man to know The meaning right, Some thing of evil hidden long ago From life and light. What his wind-tortured eyes are fixed upon, And what his hands Seem groping after when the sun is gone, None understands. Long he remains upon the dune alone As one asleep; Over his feet the chilly sand has blown And drifted deep.
The piano's a machine hidden in a heavy piece of furniture. As a machine, it's devised to spill out infinities of notions as a piece of furniture it's a wardrobe, a cupboard, a house, an hotel big enough to hide every possible music among corridors of blond wood, passageways, staircases, all ordained from the beginning, the sounds buried like the veins in rock. To play is to go searching in the keyboard; to make music's to recognize what's found.
voices to voices,lip to lip i swear(to noone everyone)constitutes undying;or whatever this and that petal confutes... to exist being a peculiar form of sleep what's beyond logic happens beneath will; nor can these moments be translated:i say that even after April by God there is no excuse for May  bring forth your flowers and machinery:sculpture and prose flowers guess and miss machinery is the more accurate,yes it delivers the goods,Heaven knows (yet are we mindful,though not as yet awake, of ourselves which shout and cling,being for a little while and which easily break in spite of the best overseeing) i mean that the blond absence of any program except last and always and first to live makes unimportant what i and you believe; not for philosophy does this rose give a damn... bring on your fireworks,which are a mixed splendor of piston and of pistil;very well provided an instant may be fixed so that it will not rub,like any other pastel. (While you and i have lips and voices which are for kissing and to sing with who cares if some oneeyed son of a bitch invents an instrument to measure Spring with? each dream nascitur,is not made...) why then to Hell with that:the other;this, since the thing perhaps is to eat flowers and not to be afraid.
Long we'd sought for Avalon, Avalon the rest place; Long, long we'd laboured The oars yea for years. Late, late one eventide Saw we o'er still waters Turrets rise and roof frets Golden in a glory, Heard for a heart-beat Women choirs and harpings Waft down the wave-ways. Saw we long-sought Avalon Sink thro' still waters  Long, long we'd laboured The oars yea, and yearned.
Good flying days: the kites kite-shaped Stirring restlessly in children's fingers. That urgent, papery flap of trapped insects, Light laths crossed on whispering cellophane, And wind bowling over the hard ribs Where the low-tide forest bares its teeth Out of the old coal-measures. Under the gallantries of a flying circus The usual dog eats up enormous nowheres, Malcolm Campbell on the Bonneville salt-flats, And little shrieks bob ankle-deep in foam. Out of our canvas roll we build a bird, The crush of silk tightened, polished cane Slipped into brass ferrules. O monstrous crow, Hawk of the World, outface, outsoar The low-sky gaggle, lime and lemon dancers Tossing their heads, fluttering Chinese pigtails. As afternoon is polished off to grey I send my twist of paper up the line To bring the dark wings down, dismantle summer. Only air whirring in cloth, sea hissing, And all the shadows pitching in the grass. New tides of light bleach out our markers, Those jaunty signs that we were there, yes, there, Holding the brief sun on a dipping leash While water cleaned our footprints from the world.
There is nothing false in thee. In thy heat the youngest body Has warmth and light. In thee the quills of the sun Find adornment. What does not die Is with thee. Thou art clothed in robes of music. Thy voice awakens wings. And still more with thee Are the flowers of earth made bright. Upon thy deeps the fiery sails Of heaven glide. Thou art the radiance and the joy. Thy heart shall only fail When all else has fallen. What does not perish Lives in thee.
Night here,a covert All spun, webs in one how without grabbing hold it?  Get into the bird-cage without starting them singing. &ldquo;Forming the New Society Within the shell of the Old&rdquo; The motto in the Wobbly Hall Some old Finns and Swedes playing cards Fourth and Yesler in Seattle. O you modest, retiring, virtuous young ladies pick the watercress, pluck the yarrow &ldquo;Kwan kwan&rdquo; goes the crane in the field, I'll meet you tomorrow; A million workers dressed in black and buried, We make love in leafy shade. Bodhidharma sailing the Yangtze on a reed Lenin in a sealed train through Germany Hs&uuml;an Tsang, crossing the Pamirs Joseph, Crazy Horse, living the last free starving high-country winter of their tribes. Surrender into freedom, revolt into slavery  Confucius no better  (with Lao-tzu to keep him in check) &ldquo;Walking about the countryside all one fall To a heart's content beating on stumps.&rdquo;
Places I love come back to me like music, Hush me and heal me when I am very tired; I see the oak woods at Saxton's flaming In a flare of crimson by the frost newly fired; And I am thirsty for the spring in the valley As for a kiss ungiven and long desired. I know a bright world of snowy hills at Boonton, A blue and white dazzling light on everything one sees, The ice-covered branches of the hemlocks sparkle Bending low and tinkling in the sharp thin breeze, And iridescent crystals fall and crackle on the snow-crust With the winter sun drawing cold blue shadows from the trees. Violet now, in veil on veil of evening, The hills across from Cromwell grow dreamy and far; A wood-thrush is singing soft as a viol In the heart of the hollow where the dark pools are; The primrose has opened her pale yellow flowers And heaven is lighting star after star. Places I love come back to me like music  Mid-ocean, midnight, the waves buzz drowsily; In the ship's deep churning the eerie phosphorescence Is like the souls of people who were drowned at sea, And I can hear a man's voice, speaking, hushed, insistent, At midnight, in mid-ocean, hour on hour to me.
<> Sought out and found the way of light and truth; His heart with holy impulses was stirred. And boldly forth he went to preach the word. Sometimes he had not even a resting-place  Footsore and weary, still he cried &ldquo;free grace&rdquo;; And yet in pastures green the shepherd fed, And by the cooling stream was often led. Year after year is born and glides away; Generations rise and flourish and decay; Flowers bud and blossom, fade and fall, But eternal truth outlives them all. And so a hundred years have passed away Since the immortal  And where he sleeps the sun's departing ray Long lingers o'er that hallowed heap of clay. He came of humble parentage to earth; A slave was he of meek and lowly birth; A bondsman, dared not even raise his voice, Nor o'er his young, his darling child rejoice. But God his promises has ever kept, And the foul stigma from this land is swept  At last the slavish chains forever broke. And falls at last the bondman's galling yoke. As they march on you hear their steady tread, With  The cause of Christ to distant islands borne Shall flourish till the resurrection morn!
Back to the figure of the man in the drill dancing. <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> O my soul, now man's desolation into his beginnings return!
She re-enters her life The way a parachutist re-enters the coarser atmosphere of earth, exchanging the sensual shapes of clouds for cloud-shaped trees rushing to meet her, their branches sharp, their soft leaves transitory. She notices smells, the scent of pines piercing the surface of memory  that dark lake submerged in pines in which her husband starts to swim back into sight. And as she lands in their own garden, after her brief but brilliant flight, she pushes the silky parachute from her as she pushed the white sheet from her breasts just yesterday.
An Idea ran about the world screaming with the pain of the mind until it met a child who stopped it with a word. The Idea leaned over those newborn eyes and dreamed of the nature of things: the nature of memory and the nature of love; and forgave itself and all men. Quieted in a sea of sleeping the Idea began its long return  renewed by the child's sea-colored eyes remembered the flesh, smiled and said: I see birds, spring and the birthplace unknown by the stable stone. I know light and I know motion and I remember I am not alone. The Idea voyaged nearer my breathing, saying Come balance come into the love of these faces and forces find us our equilibrium. And the child stirred, asking his questions. The Idea grew more fleshly and spoke: Beaten down I was Down I knew very long Newborn I begin. And the child went on asking his questions. The Idea journeying into my body returned, and I knew the nature of One, and could forget One, and turn to the child, and whole could turn to the world again. Until the pain turns into answers And all the masters become askers And all the victims again doers And all the sources break in light. The child goes alive, asking his questions.
this to put aside for a while whatever's its place here we sit the day's gardens eat coming in up on the mountain shadows dispelled a leaning house grass pressed in the wind across the room the big pots no track the light falls
Ye on the broad high mountains of old Eri,  Mourn all the night and day, The man is gone who guided ye, unweary,  Through the long bitter way. Ye by the waves that close in our sad nation,  Be full of sudden fears, The man is gone who from his lonely station  Has moulded the hard years. Mourn ye on grass-green plains of Eri fated,  For closed in darkness now Is he who laboured on, derided, hated,  And made the tyrant bow. Mourn and then onward, there is no returning  He guides ye from the tomb; His memory now is a tall pillar, burning  Before us in the gloom!
<> Call them by name; call him &ldquo;Paul.&rdquo; She is &ldquo;Virginia.&rdquo; He leans on his spade. Virginia fondles a leaden fledgling in its nest. Paul fondles with his Eyes. You need no cast in words. You know the Statues, but not their Lawns; nor words to plant again the shade trees, felled; ponds, filled, and built over. Your Garden is destroyed, but there are other Gardens yet to spare from the destroying Spoor unseen, save in destructful Acts. Unseen a hungered Octopus crawls under ground as Fungus; eats the air as Orchids on all trees; and on all waters spreads translucent Slime. Nephews and Nieces, who would breathe sweet Air and till rich Ground, spy out against its suction; wither these spreading tentacles, these roots and radicles of cancerous Greed. Let us put Paul and Virginia back in the Garden's warmth of wet Box and Arbor Vitae. The Bell-Tree a silver shrub from Japan, is grown up Big like a willow whose Branches nose the Ground. They root and eat the Earth. They drink deep water springs while finger twigs fill neighboring winds with silent tinkles of Petals, blowing on Lilies-of-the-Valley on Larches, on copper Beeches, urn-like Elms on Lilies, Iris, Roses walled with Hedges mirrored on dark waters and, light with fruit trees, on Peonies abiding in quiet pomp with leaden Statues in a Garden, alive with Bugs and Toads. This Garden, sad as a ripe joy is sad (dead Garden) sheds no perfume of Soil, over a soil-less land. This dead Garden's seeds take root in children like the Cherry a young girl swallowed, Stem, Meat, and Stone; to bud, to bloom, to fruit and to house twittering Birds. In your Mother and Father, much you love is memory; and much they love in you is memory transplanted from Gardens of Love, which speak to Love from a dead world to another, and from Death, which speaks to life through love remembered. Nephews and Nieces, love your Statues, love their names.
The nests dropped out of the trees, the dry leaves stirred and gathered them. Bonfire to bonfire the day raced us. England's blue stink got behind my eyes. <> exhaled, made a day to remember. And she watched, she jiggled in the savoury smoke. I fell, utterly, in love. <> the trees. A life-sized moon ushered in her first words: &lsquo;Five: Never forget to wrap up warm.&rsquo; Her clothes adored me but she just smiled. We moved, on and on, saw the mothers in the bright windows with the clean dry mud outside, and, bonfire to bonfire, the night knelt down, beating the black trees from our frozen English hands.  <>
When mothers weep and fathers richly proud Worship on Sunday morning their tall son And girls in white like angels in a play Tiptoe between the potted palms And all the crimson windows pray, The preacher bound in black Opens his hands like pages of a book And holds the black and crimson law For every boy to look. Last night between the chapters of a dream, The photograph still sinning in the drawer, The boy awoke; the moon shone in the yard On hairy hollyhocks erect And buds of roses pink and hard And on the solid wall A square of light like movies fell to pose An actress naked in the night As hollyhock and rose. And to confirm his sex, breathless and white With benediction self-bestowed he knelt Oh tightly married to his childish grip, And unction smooth as holy-oil Fell from the vessel's level lip Upon the altar-cloth; Like Easter boys the blood sang in his head And all night long the tallow beads Like tears dried in the bed. Come from the church, you parents and you girls, And walk with kisses and with happy jokes Beside this man. Be doubly proud, you priest, Once for his passion in the rose, Once for his body self-released; And speak aloud of her Who in the perfect consciousness of joy Stood naked in the electric light And woke the hidden boy.
Hearing your words, and not a word among them Tuned to my liking, on a salty day When inland woods were pushed by winds that flung them Hissing to leeward like a ton of spray, I thought how off Matinicus the tide Came pounding in, came running through the Gut, While from the Rock the warning whistle cried, And children whimpered, and the doors blew shut; There in the autumn when the men go forth, With slapping skirts the island women stand In gardens stripped and scattered, peering north, With dahlia tubers dripping from the hand: The wind of their endurance, driving south, Flattened your words against your speaking mouth.
The sea's a featureless blaze. On photographs nothing comes out but glare, with that scarlet-rimmed fishing boat far-off, lost to the lens. At noon a stiff-legged tourist in shorts steps, camera poised. He's stilted as a flamingo, pink-limbed. Icons of Malta gather around him. He sweats as a procession passes and women with church-dark faces brush him as if he were air. He holds a white crocheted dress to give to his twelve-year-old daughter who moons in the apartment, sun-sore. The sky's tight as a drum, hard to breathe in, hard to walk under. He would not buy &lsquo;bikini for daughter&rsquo; though the man pressed him, with plump fingers spreading out scraps of blue cotton. Let her stay young, let her know nothing. Let her body remain skimpy and sudden. His wife builds arches of silence over her new breasts and packets of tampons marked &lsquo;slender&rsquo;. At nights, when they think she's asleep, they ache in the same places but never louder than in a whisper. He watches more women melt into a porch. Their white, still laundry flags from window to window while they are absent, their balconies blank. At six o'clock, when he comes home and snicks his key in the lock so softly neither will catch it he hears one of them laugh. They are secret in the kitchen, talking of nothing, strangers whom anyone might love.
The mermaids have come to the desert they are setting up a boudoir next to the camel who lies at their feet of roses A wall of alabaster is drawn over our heads by four rainbow men whose naked figures give off a light that slowly wriggles upon the sands I am touched by the marvelous as the mermaids' nimble fingers go through my hair that has come down forever from my head to cover my body the savage fruit of lunacy Behold the boudoir is flying away and I am holding onto the leg of the lovely one called beneath the sea BIANCA She is turning with the charm of a bird into two giant lips and I am now falling into the goblet of suicide She is the angelic doll turned black she is the child of broken elevators she is the curtain of holes that you never want to throw away she is the first woman and the first man and I am lost to have her I am hungry for the secrets of the sadistic fish I am plunging into the sea I am looking for the region where the smoke of your hair is thick where you are again climbing over the white wall where your eardrums play music to the cat that crawls in my eyes I am recalling memories of you BIANCA I am looking beyond the hour and the day to find you BIANCA
&lsquo;Remember that farmer down in Maine Who said to us, &ldquo;I've been An abandoned island Since she's gone&rdquo;?  That's the hurt of proud flesh We've known, The heart's self-borne contagion When you or I have parted us With those rending, furious Irretrievable accusations. Each gulp of air keeps the wound fresh. Left to the individual freedom Of broken ends We can't make meet, I roar Off, a space-bound satellite With no earth to encircle, adrift In that unfinished void Where nothing numbs the red scar Of a burnt-out asteroid. And yet I turn, seeking some tremor Of your light, Your heat, Wherever in that emptiness You are.&rsquo;
Skimmed into the sea of the century you went well but fell short of the far shore. Now we see it in terms of that journey, the stone skipping over the waves of war. Where it sank it bedded down and formed: sandbar, reef, atoll. Now it's an island; boats set out from it in treacherous storms, telescopes strain to pick out the mainland. The first to cross find a coast of sharp rocks, sheer cliffs, high tides and a dangerous swell. A branch, like a vine, trails down from the top  they start to climb, then stop; they know that smell: <> but commonly this tree's known by its fruit.
Days bury days, then weeks, months, years, and centuries; then on, odd on even, even on odd, a pile, a hill, a mountain, infinitude and start again: this world. Time rolls on, but the axle stays: in a story they charmed the world and it stopped, but a fish moved through the still water. That fish is thought. It won't rest. It won't. It won't. In my former life in my dreams it was always dark but something kept me warm. It folded around and wrapped me against the cold. What was it? In my dream I woke it was my father's coat. Now, awake, I build another dream: in the big chair with leather, with brass buttons, my father rocks again. &ldquo;We lived in the snow,&rdquo; he says, &ldquo;we are Indian, Asian, African.&rdquo; In this, the water of Now, we swim. Our path closes in crystal behind us; ahead it glistens. Listen: nobody knows any more than ever. My father rocks; the brass buttons are shining.
I pretend To live in the present. Now is what I crave, Finches at the feeder, Sunlight on a rose. But memory The relentless tide Suddenly brings alive A forgotten moment With such a freight Of passionate grief in it I cry out Alone. The past is Now. The tide rises and falls. There is no shutting it out.
<> town and dreamed of romance and big things off somewhere the way the railroad trains all ran. She could see the smoke of the engines get lost down where the streaks of steel flashed in the sun and when the newspapers came in on the morning mail she knew there was a big Chicago far off, where all the trains ran. She got tired of the barber shop boys and the post office chatter and the church gossip and the old pieces the band played on the Fourth of July and Decoration Day And sobbed at her fate and beat her head against the bars and was going to kill herself When the thought came to her that if she was going to die she might as well die struggling for a clutch of romance among the streets of Chicago. She has a job now at six dollars a week in the basement of the Boston Store And even now she beats her head against the bars in the same old way and wonders if there is a bigger place the railroads run to from Chicago where maybe there is romance and big things and real dreams that never go smash.
When she is sleeping find her if you see with your eyes She lives in pure loss alone minds in silence the charm of secret You shall not find to give her the form of touch she needs Turn no more scythe to fields she shall not bend her head Her bitter splendour green eyes are ashes birds treasure wrecked on dry rock her smile a sign of tears All she has is tired Hand with hand shall not compose the light of giving the light of taking the absent storm on the quiet sea The winds that creep along the wall are masks winter in wolves What is lost is your loss you did not know did not find No tear lights the day-worn web no smile if you are kind take my gift of laurel thorn black wood on brown reeds I give you to learn broken stems ice wind that you who live are dead And let her stand beside the sea with the desert behind the reeds and let her mind be white sails that her eyes follow and let her smile out strength Eyes hair birds lips garden girdle of steel
Golden mists o'er Cloudland wreathing Arabesques of shining sheen, Sunny airs of violets breathing, Lure weird Fancy, Cloudland's queen. Lo! she hastens, flower-encircled, Dainty, pensive, winsome fay, Her fair brow all rose-empurpled, While around flutes pour soft lay. There is she, Imagination! Gazing upward in her dreams; Rapt, intent on meditation, Sculpturesque, yet thrilled, she seems. Planets lure her in their spaces, Stars strew gold dust on her path; She has looked them in their faces, And a hint divine she hath. Rare pellucid hues of dawning, Iris tints of summer skies, Streak fair Fancy's couch; glad Morning Bids her ope her lovely eyes. Wind-songs quaint Eolus showers Round her home of golden mist; Sweet she sings them in her bowers, And the Silence harks, I wist. All the pomp of constellations Wakes Imagination's gaze; World apart in meditations, Sits she living wondrous days. She can hear the chiming measures Of the stars with stately tread, The celestial strains she treasures, Rev'rently she bows her head. Tired heart! when life is dreary, And the years drag slowly on, Summon airy Fancy, weary Is she never, hear her song! Soul unresting, tossed with sorrow! Just one strain of harmony From Imagination borrow, Calmest joy she'll yield to thee.
Do you know what it is to dance? Perhaps, you do know, in a fashion; But by dancing I mean, Not what's generally seen, But dancing of fire and passion, Of fire and delirious passion. With a dusky-haired  Her dark, misty eyes near your own, And her scarlet-red mouth, Like a rose of the south, The reddest that ever was grown, So close that you catch Her quick-panting breath As across your own face it is blown, With a sigh, and a moan. Ah! that is dancing, As here by the Carib it's known. Now, whirling and twirling Like furies we go; Now, soft and caressing And sinuously slow; With an undulating motion, Like waves on a breeze-kissed ocean:  And the scarlet-red mouth Is nearer your own, And the dark, misty eyes Still softer have grown. Ah! that is dancing, that is loving, As here by the Carib they're known.
O beato solitudo! where have I flown to? stars overturn the wall of my music as flight of birds, they go by, the spirits opened below the lark of plenty ovens of neant overflow the docks at Veracruz This much is time summer coils the soft suck of night lone unseen eagles crash thru mud I am worn like an old sack by the celestial bum I'm dropping my eyes where all the trees turn on fire! I'm mad to go to you, Solitude who will carry me there? I'm wedged in this collision of planets/Tough! I'm ONGED! I'm the trumpet of King David the sinister elevator tore itself limb by limb You can not close you can not open you break yr head you make bloody bread!
Fast food, fast cars, fast money  it's all fast talk. Now, take ideas. They're just like grub. Until they reach your blood they ain't digested proper. The gent who'd never be caught dead talking with Egg McMuffin in his mouth, he'll talk a snow goose south in June with notions he's still chewing on. It takes a touch of patience before the cut-throat trout rocks back on his haunches roaring like a bear with fishy breath. But time will tell.
Plow enters under dead weeds, opens a seam to the creek. With wings I could plow the sea. Curving black surf across the hill, blade shine on clods, foam of roots and stubble. You can't navigate without getting dirt in your shoes. Squeak of plowed-up field mice. Walk the rut it's easier, ground carved off a foot down. Smell of water underground, cellars opened, wormwet, cunt soft, washing toward rye.
They constantly rerouted my open road, those specialists of the petty cul-de-sac, the lamebrained the halting and the myopic. Is that because I tried to light up dimwits by stuffing meaty truths into fortune cookies and offering every household an ascension balloon? Neither business flourished. I was labeled flighty for offering levitation to sticks-in-the-mud. But I've always voted the cosmological ticket and I'm still revising my lifelong opus: my definitive report on the Indescribable and why it is forever at a loss for words. Considering life has an aptitude for mellowing I expected to have only a few delusions left by the time my candle was due to be snuffed. Nearing a terminus of the Eternal Return I'm not certain now if I was on the right track or whether I know what I'm talking about. And what happens after my bucket gets kicked? I might settle for a hammock with cool siestas or a hot tub that would give me a rosy melt. If one could possibly pig out on sublimity, sublimity at the very top of its form, O that would make up for a lot.
In your sleep you talked. <> <> <> <> <> <> <> While you talked I bathed you with a sponge From a basin of ice and alcohol. I told you that in my childhood, During the mud season, old boards ran from the house To the barns and then out into pastureland ... <> <> <> <> <> <> <> I said, &ldquo;You know I love you.&rdquo; <> <> <> <> <>
Like a closed door you've just enough room to slip an envelope under  that's her smile. Secretive, for a certain man, specific to her time, which she leans away from toward us. Caught in her hair, earrings that have been ornament to, that have been lost and found by, four families of women. Passed down, put on, taken off; tossed on nightstands next to key sets and money clips, themselves, now, beneath the seats of junked cars  half-crushed, hauled cross-country half-hidden in the granular silt of skin, baked dirt, and gravel dust, improbable glints next to the pocket combs and Viceroy wrappers. That they have outlived the both of them, that they were passed down at all is extraordinary enough. Not pawned, not swapped with friends, not vacuumed up. It has taken me thirty-seven years to understand just how jewelry transcends its value  that each piece in the museum has been worn, has been breathed upon, coveted and caressed, polished against a sleeve by some clandestine lover, even if it was just the curator  alone, bleary-eyed dating, verifying. They were banged up against door frames, snagged on cloth, they met the enemy's face before the fist did, they stood for something before the word did. She had delicate wrists, the band says. Such small hands, the ring says. These earrings are shaped like wind chimes and so announced every change in her, as when the breeze picked up off the water and opened the throat of her shirt and the sun glanced off a collarbone for the first time. Children have built whole worlds for them; men too. And it doesn't matter whether copper or gold, the bones of small animals, or stones burnished smooth by the flow of one small stream the marrying, the dying, all the individual hollows of the body. Being seen, that's all we ask of this life  to be acknowledged, to make of what's been given us, each other, and in the admiring, make something more, again.
So get up speed. So you're sick with fear again so what so what Though in the past you screamed you wept you are still here alive Get up a head of speed and you may nip through rocks     without quite getting smashed apart on them So you bit on iron until the blood ran out of your lips So your eyes swam into dark blue clouds with the enormous misting shock of it So you couldn't see your hands in front of you, you hardly knew how to breathe yet you do take breath after breath, one by one you ease them all out carefully again and then you take another, for someone else will tell you when it's time to stop, not you So you ground your forehead onto the concrete to skin yourself back into manageable life because a streak of dusty red showed you could start a little harm and stop and then restart it but you lived it, look into your eye at the shiny black life rolling around in it, get up and breathe, just practising this will fill your life up steadily for months, while later on getting distracted is better as on a long drive to the seaside when after tedious hours the upside-down triangle of navy blue is glimpsed, jammed hard into the V of the land and a glad cry goes up, the car-sick infant groans but she still gets reluctantly interested despite herself, and longs for sand and fish and chips and roundabouts again  next become mildly malicious in studying the failed consolations of middle age that at least some of the people you once mistakenly went to bed with and  now sometimes look seedier, more despairing than you, though that's only because you get to use lipstick and hair-dye whereas they on the whole do not  your vanities, and pleasure in theatrical self-blame, have got you where you are today that's here: and though you've noticed now that you can breathe again, you do
<>  Of twilight hung, as tho' the lids of night,  In one liquescent utterance large as light,  Let fall the delicate silver of her tears; Monotonous music mute to mortal ears,  Vibrant as birds that cry across the bright  Silence and thro' the distance tense and white,  Where loud as life the incessant dawn appears. Thou art, O star, how like a conscious soul  Leaving the shadowy shores of life to blend  Deep in the lustre of its native sea! Or like, in heaven, the pure and liquid toll  Of one unechoing bell to mark the end  Of God's rule and man's infidelity!
<> olumbus from his after- deck watched stars, absorbed in water, melt in liquid amber drifting through my summer air Now with morning shadows lifting beaches stretched before him cold &amp; clear Birds circled flapping flag &amp; mizzen mast. birds harshly hawking. without fear Discovery he sailed for. was so near <> olumbus from his after- deck watched heights he hoped for rocks he dreamed. rise solid from my simple water Parrots screamed. Soon he would touch our land. his charted mind's desire The blue sky blessed the morning with its fire But did his vision fashion as he watched the shore the slaughter that his soldiers furthered here? Pike point &amp; musket butt hot splintered courage. bones cracked with bullet shot tipped black boot in my belly. The whips uncurled desire? <> olumbus from his after- deck saw bearded fig trees. yellow pouis blazed like pollen &amp; thin waterfalls suspended in the green as his eyes climbed towards the highest ridges where our farms were hidden Now he was sure he heard soft voices mocking in the leaves What did this journey mean. this new world mean. dis covery? or a return to terrors he had sailed from. known before? I watched him pause Then he was splashing silence Crabs snapped their claws and scattered as he walked towards our shore
Your grieving moonlight face looks down  Through the forest of my fears, Crowned with a spiny bramble-crown,  Bedewed with evening tears. Why do you say &lsquo;untrue, unkind&rsquo;,  Reproachful eyes that vex my sleep? Straining in memory, I can find  No cause why you should weep. Untrue? But when, what broken oath?  Unkind? I know not even your name. Unkind, untrue, you brand me both,  Scalding my heart with shame. The black trees shudder, dropping snow,  The stars tumble and spin. Speak, speak, or how may a child know  His ancestral sin?
April, like a leopard in the windy woods, Sports with the javelins of the weather; And the hunters, Eye-level with the world's clean brim, Sight their strings, in masking rocks not moving, And shower with arrows The innocent, immortal season. Hear how like lights these following releases Of sharpened shaft-flights sing across the air, And play right through, unwounding, clearest windworks  To disappear, unpublished, in the reeds. Where their words are quenched, the world is quickened: The lean air suddenly flowers, The little voices of the rivers change; So that the hunters put away their silver quivers, Die to the level of river and rockbrim, And are translated, homeward, To the other, solemn, world.
Oh, come again to Astolat! I will not ask you to be kind. And you may go when you will go, And I will stay behind. I will not say how dear you are, Or ask you if you hold me dear, Or trouble you with things for you, The way I did last year. So still the orchard, Lancelot, So very still the lake shall be, You could not guess though you should guess  What is become of me. So wide shall be the garden-walk, The garden-seat so very wide, You needs must think if you should think  The lily maid had died. Save that, a little way away, I'd watch you for a little while, To see you speak, the way you speak, And smile, if you should smile.
Duke Hwan of Khi, First in his dynasty, Sat under his canopy Reading his philosophy; And Phien the wheelwright Was out in the yard Making a wheel. Phien laid aside Hammer and chisel, Climbed the steps, And said to Duke Hwan: &ldquo;May I ask you, Lord, What is this you are Reading?&rdquo; The Duke said: &ldquo;The experts. The authorities.&rdquo; And Phien asked: &ldquo;Alive or dead?&rdquo; &ldquo;Dead a long time.&rdquo; &ldquo;Then,&rdquo; said the wheelwright, &ldquo;You are reading only The dirt they left behind.&rdquo; Then the Duke replied: &ldquo;What do you know about it? You are only a wheelwright. You had better give me a good explanation Or else you must die.&rdquo; The wheelwright said: &ldquo;Let us look at the affair From my point of view. When I make wheels If I go easy, they fall apart, If I am too rough, they do not fit. If I am neither too easy nor too violent They come out right. The work is what I want it to be. You cannot put this into words: You just have to know how it is. I cannot even tell my own son exactly how it is done, And my own son cannot learn it from me. So here I am, seventy years old, Still making wheels! The men of old Took all they really knew With them to the grave. And so, Lord, what you are reading there Is only the dirt they left behind them.&rdquo;
Now all the world she knew is dead  In this small room she lives her days The wash-hand stand and single bed  Screened from the public gaze. The horse-brass shines, the kettle sings,  The cup of China tea Is tasted among cared-for things  Ranged round for me to see  Lincoln, by Valentine and Co.,  Now yellowish brown and stained, But there some fifty years ago  Her Harry was ordained; Outside the Church at Woodhall Spa  The smiling groom and bride, And here's his old tobacco jar  Dried lavender inside. I do not like to ask if he  Was &ldquo;High&rdquo; or &ldquo;Low&rdquo; or &ldquo;Broad&rdquo; Lest such a question seem to be  A mockery of Our Lord. Her full grey eyes look far beyond The little room and me To village church and village pond  And ample rectory. She sees her children each in place  Eyes downcast as they wait, She hears her Harry murmur Grace,  Then heaps the porridge plate. Aroused at seven, to bed by ten,  They fully lived each day, Dead sons, so motor-bike-mad then,  And daughters far away. Now when the bells for Eucharist  Sound in the Market Square, With sunshine struggling through the mist  And Sunday in the air, The veil between her and her dead  Dissolves and shows them clear, The Consecration Prayer is said  And all of them are near.
<> Back to the perilous gates of Truth he went  Back to fierce wisdom and the Orient, To the Dawn that is, that shall be, and has been: Previsioned of the madness and the mean, He stood where Asia, crowned with ravishment, The curtain of Love's inner shrine had rent, And after had gone scarred by the Unseen. There at his touch there was a treasure chest, And in it was a gleam, but not of gold; And on it, like a flame, these words were scrolled: &ldquo;I keep the mintage of Eternity. Who comes to take one coin may take the rest, And all may come but not without the key.&rdquo;
Officially the heart is oblong, muscular, and filled with longing. But anyone who has painted the heart knows that it is also spiked like a star and sometimes bedraggled like a stray dog at night and sometimes powerful like an archange's drum. And sometimes cube-shaped like a draughtsman's dream and sometimes gaily round like a ball in a net. And sometimes like a thin line and sometimes like an explosion. And in it is only a river, a weir and at most one little fish by no means golden. More like a grey jealous loach. It certainly isn't noticeable at first sight. Anyone who has painted the heart knows that first he had to discard his spectacles, his mirror, throw away his fine-point pencil and carbon paper and for a long while walk outside.
   The snow sweeps on As it swept with sleet last night:  The Earth around  Breathes never a sound, Wrapped in its shroud of white.  A waked cock crows  Under the snows; Then silence. After while  The sky grows blue,  And a star looks through With a kind o' bitter smile.  A whining dog;  An axe on a log, And a muffled voice that calls:  A cow's long low;  Then footsteps slow Stamping into the stalls.  A bed of straw  Where the wind blows raw Through cracks of the stable door:  A child's small cry,  A voice nearby, That says, &ldquo;One mouth the more.&rdquo;  A different note  In a man's rough throat As he turns at an entering tread   Satyrs! see!  &ldquo;My woman she Was brought last night to bed!&rdquo;  A cry of &ldquo;Halt!&rdquo;   &ldquo;Ach! ich bin kalt!&rdquo; &ldquo;A spy!&rdquo; &ldquo;No.&rdquo; &ldquo;That is clear!  There's a good shake-down  I' the jail in town  For her!&rdquo; And then, &ldquo;My orders here.&rdquo;  A shot, sharp-rolled  As the clouds unfold: A scream; and a cry forlorn ...  Clothed red with fire,  Like the Heart's Desire, Look down the Christmas Morn.  The babe with light  Is haloed bright, And it is Christmas Day:  A cry of woe;  Then footsteps slow, And the wild guns, far away.
At four years Nature is mountainous, Mysterious, and submarine. Even A city child knows this, hearing the subway's Rumor underground. Between the grate, Dropping his penny, he learned out all loss, The irretrievable cent of fate, And now this newest of the mysteries, Confronts his honest and his studious eyes  His mother much too fat and absentminded, Gazing far past his face, careless of him, His fume, his charm, his bedtime, and warm milk, As soon the night will be too dark, the spring Too late, desire strange, and time too fast, This first estrangement is a gradual thing (His mother once so svelte, so often sick! Towering father did this: what a trick!) Explained too cautiously, containing fear, Another being's being, becoming dear: All men are enemies: thus even brothers Can separate each other from their mothers! No better example than this unborn brother Shall teach him of his exile from his mother, Measured by his distance from the sky, Spoken in two vowels, I am I.
There is the car, which won't start. It's busted, and furthermore The damn thing's  Of the street, and the poor sucker driver Is pissed off. He's in the middle Of the street, The street is in Manhattan, and so You have to consider what the guy In the white Caddie behind him might have Under his coat, and you hope The poor, red-faced S.O.B.'s Luck won't run from bad To worse, hope he doesn't Leap from behind his wheel Sopping wet with embarrassment And scratch the other guy's Finish. That's The sort of story The  From the police blotter, the Type of incident You were warned about In driving school.  <> <> <> <> Told me, and meanwhile A crowd has gathered, a Line of cars Idle like butter In a fat man's vein.
Growing up is to leave the fireside with its tales, the burying of the head between God's knees. It is to perceive that knowledge of him comes from the genes' breaking of an involved code, from the mind's parallel at-homeness with missile and scalpel. Literature is on the way out. The still, small voice is that of Orpheus looking over his shoulder at a dream fading. At the mouth of the cave is the machine's whirlwind, hurrying the new arts in, advancing the threshold of our permitted exposure to its becquerels and decibels.
The isle is for islanders, some born  They like being surrounded by And anchored in the ever-changing sea, For it is just this being enclosed In a small space within a huge space That makes them feel both safe and free, Tilling small fields under a huge sky. The isle is for islanders, some made  They are drawn here, the two-in-one, To be alone together, hand in hand, Walking the silence of the high plateau Where bees and heather marry well, Or down long flights of stairs to caves. Love is the summer island, safe and wild. Islands are for people who are islands, Who have always been detached from the main For a purpose, or because they crave The free within the framed as poets do, The solitary for whom being alone Is not a loneliness but fertile good. Here on this island I feel myself at home. And because I am here, happy among the bees, A donkey in the field, the crooked paths That lead me always to some precipitous fall And the sudden opening out of blue below, Hope flows back into my crannies now. I am ready to begin the long journey Toward love, the mainland, perhaps not alone.
So little of the earth, you open the earth for me. Having no more need of me than I of you, I am as alone with you as without you. I try to love the sky as the sea's accomplice, but nothing human can help us know the stars. Threshing a poem or a grape-harvest takes four equal limbs and a horizontal cutting that has always already begun. You are speaking of that wholly woven day, not stunning, nor bitter. Your pleasure just fits on the postcard of evening; an envelope would have given off too sharp a smell. Another room closes the door of the sun and gathers carefully all the water that falls.
On nights when the moon seems inpenetrable  a locked porthole to space; when the householder bars his windows and doors, and his dog lies until dawn, one jeweled eye open; when the maiden sleeps with her rosy knees sealed tightly together, on such nights the safecracker sets to work. Axe ... Chisel ... Nitroglycerin ... Within the vault lie forty thousand tons of gold; the heaped up spoils of Ali Baba's cave; the secrets of the molecule. He sands his fingertips to feel the subtle vibrations of wheel lining up, just so, with wheel. His toolmarks are his fingerprints. And now a crack appears on the side of the egg, a single fault line, and within: the golden yolk just waiting. A kind of wind ... a door flies open ... a glitter of forsythia forced out of the branch. With smoothest fingertips you touch the locked cage of my ribs ... just so. My knees fall open. And Cleopatra smiles, whose own Egyptians first invented the lock.
The vane on Hughley steeple  Veers bright, a far-known sign, And there lie Hughley people,  And there lie friends of mine. Tall in their midst the tower  Divides the shade and sun, And the clock strikes the hour  And tells the time to none. To south the headstones cluster,  The sunny mounds lie thick; The dead are more in muster  At Hughley than the quick. North, for a soon-told number,  Chill graves the sexton delves, And steeple-shadowed slumber  The slayers of themselves. To north, to south, lie parted,  With Hughley tower above, The kind, the single-hearted,  The lads I used to love. And, south or north, 'tis only  A choice of friends one knows, And I shall ne'er be lonely  Asleep with these or those.
Dear Mary,  Yes, it will be bliss To go with you by train to Diss, Your walking shoes upon your feet; We'll meet, my sweet, at Liverpool Street. That levellers we may be reckoned Perhaps we'd better travel second; Or, lest reporters on us burst, Perhaps we'd better travel first. Above the chimney-pots we'll go Through Stepney, Stratford-atte-Bow And out to where the Essex marsh Is filled with houses new and harsh Till, Witham pass'd, the landscape yields On left and right to widening fields, Flint church-towers sparkling in the light, Black beams and weather-boarding white, Cricket-bat willows silvery green And elmy hills with brooks between, Maltings and saltings, stack and quay And, somewhere near, the grey North Sea; Then further gentle undulations With lonelier and less frequent stations, Till in the dimmest place of all The train slows down into a crawl And stops in silence.... Where is this? Dear Mary Wilson, this is Diss.
We keep our quilts in closets and do not dance. We hoe thistles along fence rows for fear we may not be perfect as our Heavenly Father. We clean up his disasters. No one has to call; we just show up in the wake of tornadoes with hammers, after floods with buckets. Like Jesus, the servant, we wash each other's feet twice a year and eat the Lord's Supper, afraid of sins hidden so deep in our organs they could damn us unawares, swallowing this bread, his body, this juice. Growing up, we love the engravings in  men drowned like cats in burlap sacks, the Catholic inquisitors, the woman who handed a pear to her son, her tongue screwed to the roof of her mouth to keep her from singing hymns while she burned. We love Catherine the Great and the rich tracts she gave us in the Ukraine, bright green winter wheat, the Cossacks who torched it, and Stalin, who starved our cousins while wheat rotted in granaries. We must love our enemies. We must forgive as our sins are forgiven, our great-uncle tells us, showing the chain and ball in a cage whittled from one block of wood while he was in prison for refusing to shoulder a gun. He shows the clipping from 1916: Mennonites are German milksops, too yellow to fight. We love those Nazi soldiers who, like Moses, led the last cattle cars rocking out of the Ukraine, crammed with our parents children then  learning the names of Kansas, Saskatchewan, Paraguay. This is why we cannot leave the beliefs or what else would we be? why we eat 'til we're drunk on shoofly and moon pies and borscht. We do not drink; we sing. Unaccompanied on Sundays, those hymns in four parts, our voices lift with such force that we lift, as chaff lifts toward God.
Out of its pit the sea labors to move. It cannot for the storm's torment rise Or shake the tempest from its mouth and eyes  Held down by something like a weighted net. But far upon it, intricate and moved, A great wave nebular, bannered green and blue, Raised up, scribbled with histories burns through Its destiny, fulfills a perfect year. Thus, the escaped hues of earth and heaven Over the shoulders of this slave, Return as if by chance the dark world's look From the high, morning windows of a wave To fishermen bound to the bitter mill, Salt-blind, fighters with nets, subdued to kill.
in our adolescence we played at love the kind that surfaced for too many pretty faces attached to bodies that stopped one's breath always surrounded by innocent laughter that continued until the rings were firmly placed on the left side of our hearts. memories are made of this. in this season of ripened watermelons, pre-driven cars and year-round vegetables from California we now accept breathless prayers while gently exchanging thread, bread and long life with this elegant woman who knows God and you. she believes you are the river running into her desert. we are here to confirm the richness of her earth, of her decision. the truth is that this poet does not wish to age alone and is known by many and most to recognize succint beauty and deep love especially if such love is shining luminously upon him.
Yesterday at the motel desk in Ocala I could not remember my zip. Today I can speak Etruscan. It came back. It won't be called. It comes. And sometimes my oath to Caesar, which need not be binding in Ocala, but break it on the causeway past Marathon Key and the sea is impassable: you will be taken back, nailed upside down to the cross, and be made to remember sacred Marcia who stole from her parents to run from honor with you. She died of bad air from the marshes, but first knew all the words to all the songs she took with her. I can't even remember the tunes, till they start uncalled. It comes and goes and I stay wary. I have grown a beard but keep moving and avoid most public places. Old comrades can see through hair, and it is death to be recognized. I did not call my life to these evasions, nor Marcia to that fevered bed. It came. Between Ostia and the Keys. In the new car whose license number I can never remember.
Now nights grow cold and colder,  And north the wild vane swings, And round each tree and boulder  The driving snow-storm sings  Come, make my old heart older,  O memory of lost things! Of Hope, when promise sung her  Brave songs, and I was young, That banquets now on hunger  Since all youth's songs are sung; Of Love, who walks with younger  Sweethearts the flowers among. Ah, well! while Life holds levee,  Death's ceaseless dance goes on. So let the curtains, heavy  About my couch, be drawn  The curtains, dark and heavy,  Where all shall sleep anon.
When she first sent me the news of the disorder that had crept into the arithmetic of waves I thought it was a California thing a weekend miracle that would fall into the air as soon as something sillier appeared. Then I read the deep text of her distress the shiver she detected on her inner thigh when Berg's  and the rocks were just sitting there off the coast puzzled as sunbathers at a sudden cloud. Where are our numbers now? Nothing counted. I read her note again: &ldquo;Women in long dresses are walking along the shallow crests of waves reading long newspapers. Tawny siameses slink around their neat ankles undisturbed. This was supposed to be the sea. The horizon is still there, with a hint of China on the other side. Have you heard anything that would explain?&rdquo; Then the part about the radio, the passionate dissonance, the thigh. I have heard nothing, nothing. Don't ask me to explain the ones you see, the world is full of people, everyone but you and me. Only we are missing. Hence the letter, music, cats, hallucination of waves. The ocean never moved. From before the beginning of the world the sea was motionless and still is, the serene mineral called water is the stone of it, polished, reflecting the amours and arrogance of cloud. It never moved. The women are real, their newspapers real, their cats. But the hems of their dresses are dry as bone. How can I dare to tell her this? The miracle is that we seem to see it move whenas it's still. For just one little minute you saw the thing the way it really is.
Minnesota winter, drained of color, and the milk he delivered minutes ago has frozen in its tray on the step. My father leaves the truck to gaze at pinnacled ice on Lake Superior. Not yet dawn, it's 1946, and the bottle he drops abstractedly on the sidewalk glows like a single rooming house lamp. My father wants to know if he can die, asking snow and a woman he won't meet for years, asking an unborn son. Last night he walked from the movies alone, staring long at the yellow marquees, parking-lot coupes in snow, as if he could take his life in his hands and shake it, a glove, an overshoe. He stands to breathe the ice-mist he's just expelled, his life so close he can't touch it. Last night December snow in the desert foothills. Near dawn I walked until I lost myself, having no answer to give you. By noon the snow was gone. I came to myself again. And in the story I've been telling you rise and pull the crystals of frozen milk from your overcoat. You inch up the hill again, truck in low and pushing hard to a field where a snow fence has bowed all night to the wind. And we learn sometimes to accept our breath, calm and pale as milk in snow: I'm standing at the window where I'm always made to stand, where this life is sometimes my own.
I rented it cheap, that terra-cotta room at the top of the castle still half home, yet half hotel  full of ancient dusty photos of the Rajput lords with their turbans and swords and an overhead fan idly whipping the air. Then one weekend the landlord asked for the key, he didn't say why. But all was clear by midmorning Monday, for newly-wed lovers do not pick up after themselves. A strand of her long black hair lay thick as a mare's upon the pillow. And the sheets told their story, slashed out in red ink. It was my task in that midmorning sun to ignore this distraction. But like a forgetful peacock I wandered the roof where, it seemed, they had spent most of their time. A bottle not quite empty stood by two glasses, lipstick on one. Against the ocher wall of my room was a bureau with pitcher, basin, towel laid aside, comb of genuine tortoise shell left behind, holding one glossy hair long enough to come to her ankle. Sun struck the scene, nothing but blue sky in the mirror where there had been stars. Inside, over a candle, another mirror was angled so old and flaked it had seen a thousand such scenes. I grasped that the high and ornate charpoy with enameled black posts rising halfway to the ceiling was kept for just such occasions left unrequired for years at a time, then offered for love on its altar. There are times when life is so empty you can do nothing but gaze after, like a homeless pup watching a parade.
He is the final builder of the total building, The final dreamer of the total dream, Or will be. Building and dream are one. There is a total building and there is A total dream. There are words of this, Words, in a storm, that beat around the shapes. There is a storm much like the crying of the wind, Words that come out of us like words within, That have rankled for many lives and made no sound. He can hear them, like people on the walls, Running in the rises of common speech, Crying as that speech falls as if to fail. There is a building stands in a ruinous storm, A dream interrupted out of the past, From beside us, from where we have yet to live.
Upon the fallen cheek a gauzy down  And on the nape  indecently a mat of yellow hair stuck with celluloid pins not quite matching it  that's two shades darker at the roots Hanging from the ears the hooks piercing the flesh  gold and semi- precious stones  And in her lap the dog (Youth) resting his head on the ample shoulder his bright mouth agape pants restlessly backward
Snow White was always waiting for The Prince And that was the story of Snow White Snow Red was the one, wasn't she, who was always pricking her fingers on the needles she sewed with, and leaving the drops behind her all over the place? or wasn't that actually how Sleeping Beauty went to sleep, and the Prince who did wake her had to arouse his horse to go over a thicket which surrounded the whole Castle like a thorn apple hedge fence in one leap, and wasn't at all looking for anything and simply went in there and idle like somebody poking around sticking their nose into anything simply that it does lie around and looks unused and and covered with stuff, ran into the girl up on the top floor where she had fallen, straight from the bite of the sewing machine?
Not a pin drops. No breathing. Please, please no sound. (&ldquo;Make them niggers cut out that &lsquo;tom foolery&rsquo;. Jesus, ain't in Georgia!&rdquo;) You cannot make noise or the spirit will hear We'll nail up your mouth if you try to sing We changed the spelling of Prophet to Profit We changed Soul to Sole We covered spirit with a ghost We changed Sun to Son, and with the help of the right Farther and knowledge of What Goest? He cd get his rightful inheritance. No. we took the mother out. We burned broads from Salem to Troy. From Soweto to Philadelphia to transform the pyramid of life to a triangle of death. We took the head and nuts off the ankh changed the life sign to a cemetery advertisement. Then had mfs wear death around the necks they wd long for it so. We dis connected creativity and art. But if it ain't no creativity ain't no art, and if ain't no art even the schools must close, and the schoolmen go back to Hairy Mystery! The Father The Son And The Holy Ghost is a Joke What happened to the Mother, Fools! There is no life without the mortar and the pestle, the thing and the thang, without boys and girls, women and men in their blue quivering funk rising till jism brings a new day. We created tragedy by killing our fathers, fucking our mothers putting out our own eyes, and wandering the world as an adverstisement for &ldquo;modernism&rdquo; We separated thought from feeling. We thought feeling wd stop us thinking, or vice versa. But then I do want to bore you. And the cross roads we took recrossed, recrossed, and the cold north was not that any more, but we were anyway, and then to exist was only possible w/ the slandered smoke of tortured change. From its we became ex-its! We were signs but w/o the seed, blind, we had egos instead of eggs the missing excitement, Gee, Baby, Sin! Our epitaph!
God, you've so much to do, To think of, watch and listen to, That I will let all else go by And lending ear and eye Help you to watch how in the combe Winds sweep dead leaves without a broom; And rooks in the spring-reddened trees Restore their villages, Nest by dark nest Swaying at rest on the trees' frail unrest; Or on this limestone wall, Leaning at ease, with you recall How once these heavy stones Swam in the sea as shells and bones; And hear that owl snore in a tree Till it grows dark enough for him to see; In fact, will learn to shirk No idleness that I may share your work.
I run up the stairs too fast every morning and panting for mail, I stagger inside and there she sits wagging a negative finger. Her frown is etched in and her mouth is sour. <> This is Odysseus. I've come a long way. I've beaten a giant, real mean with one eye. Even the sea. I've defeated the water. But now I'm home, pooped. Where's Penelope? <> My name is Joseph and this, my wife Mary. we've had a long journey and Mary is heavy. The facts are odd. The child could be holy and I wonder, have you a room in your inn? <> I'm Genghis Khan and this is my army. We've conquered your land. Now we want women. Bring them today at high noon to the square. After we've had them, we'll get out of here. <> I'm Michelangelo, here to make statues. I've lugged this damn marble all the way from the Alps. I'll need a large scaffold and plenty of ropes, a chisel, a mallet and oodles of wine. <> Oh, heroes of time, you're never a hero until you've endured ten days with no mail. Slaughter the stars and come home in splendor. She'll always be there at the end of the trail. <>
<> My mother wept, My father sold five Of the flock he kept To buy me a shroud And a marble shaft  I lay in my lilies And cried and laughed. My flesh was hard As the marble stone, And the snail and the sluggard Left me alone. The snail and the sluggard Passed me by For a softer flesh And a tenderer eye. Cold as the marble, Pale as a bride, I lay in my lilies And laughed and cried.
I send for his birthday a gift such as a boy might wear with delight  a bola pendant turquoise blue stone with fissures like those of the brain or parched earth he once plowed as I followed. He never wore, of course, anything other than black bowties when he circled the barber chair like Samson at his millwheel and curls went falling everywhere until his eager boy ran forth with the broom, sweeping away even the air before straw brushed the floor. He will look down and toy with the bola, hold it up in his palm as if it were a timepiece, the chain coiled, and be told who sent it, my name pronounced more than once. He will hand the gift over, let it be hung in place, tightened like a noose. But he will not be able to recall the son, his eldest, who wrote from a near deathbed to say he had begged too often for bread, got only stones. To the letter no response was forthcoming. A stone settled in my chest, and he made other sons. I send him stone cracked like the sky jagged with lightning when he turned his back to the wind, dragged the boy not yet forgotten into the cellar while the tornado howled overhead, black and roaring as a runaway train. He too in that season before he learned a new trade and moved into town had plowed up nothing but stones. And thus across a vast desert I send one more stone.
Black eyed susan rich orange round the purple core the white daisy is not enough Crowds are white as farmers who live poorly But you are rich in savagery  Arab Indian dark woman
We came down above the houses In a stiff curve, and At the edge of Paris airport Saw an empty tunnel  The back half of a plane, black On the snow, nobody near it, Tubular, burnt-out and frozen. When we faced again The snow-white runways in the dark No sound came over The loudspeakers, except the sighs Of the lonely pilot. The cold of metal wings is contagious: Soon you will need wings of your own, Cornered in the angle where Time and life like a knife and fork Cross, and the lifeline in your palm Breaks, and the curve of an acroplane's track Meets the straight skyline. The images of relief: Hospital pyjamas, screens round a bed A man with a bloody face Sitting up in bed, conversing cheerfully Through cut lips: These will fail you some time. You will find yourself alone Accelerating down a blind Alley, too late to stop And know how light your death is; You will be scattered like wreckage, The pieces every one a different shape Will spin and lodge in the hearts Of all who love you.
They are going to <> that's what they call it, noun to verb. A stream turned out years ago from its channel to run in cement tunnels, dank and airless till it joined a sewer, will be released to sun, rain, pebbles, mud, yellow iris, the sky above it and trees leaning over to be reflected! At night, stars or at least streetlamps will gleam in it, fish and waterbugs swim again in its ripples; and though its course, more or less the old one it followed before its years of humiliation, will pass near shops and the parking lot's glittering metallic desert, yet this unhoped-for pardon will once more permit the stream to offer itself at last to the lake, the lake will accept it, take it into itself, the stream restored will become pure lake.
A photograph of a woman in black. I cut her out of a history book. I talk to her like a lover. I want to cheer her up. I set our supper table. I turn the lights on when the evening comes. When I turn them off, I can hear her sigh. She comes from Poznan. One of her feet is shorter than the other. She studied French in school. She can still recite a bit of Villon. Now she's walking through the snow. She's coming my way, But there's a wolf-headed dog behind her, And a soldier with high squeaky boots.
He as wandering he walks up to the mailbox imagines, his mind lapsing, that Mathew is living. Among the steeplebush. I do not dare reach to him there, bereaved are touchy. But I intend to leave him behind with his botany and try what it's like on a longer hike. That man would rather go on mourning than his son be gone for good. This is impractical even in dull Stratford Hollow. I'll go roaming among the screaming cars in the city, carefully threading my way. Let him go crazy back there without me. A day will come when I am dying we two again shall meet. And when we look like strangers into each other's sullen eyes, what shall I say and he to me? when once for all we join in absolute bawling, in the blinding tears that blot the world out?
Some apparitions can't help making history stand still and stop unfolding its old accordion medley of hopes and meanings The way the edges of lit clouds appear to give lightning a strange duration as it breaks across the sky or the way being propped up by the crutch of an oak seems to keep the sun from going down and thereby forgiving everything
I would not interdict Unscrupulous passion. But the cloud is not strict In its shape as the sun For a cloud cannot win To a sun's discipline. We have seen states Scatter and saints go down. The storm abates Destruction goes on And only the wind exults In the storm's results. I would ask of the proud They protect their lust. For lowering could And rising dust, These go. Our pain Is great, but we remain. Fools of the intellect And the starved bone Were content to erect Their rage upon These disasters of blood. But can they carve in mud? We bide this storm In naked emptiness And find no wandering warm To the night's distress. By the gleam of stable straw I stone one thought as law.
'Twas late in the month of December,  And all things were merry and gay; When Santa Claus came from his dwelling of fame,  And took up the reins in his sleigh. Ere he seated, he sounded his bugle,  In a tone that was cheering and clear; He then cried out, with a merry old shout,  To his three score span of deer. Then away with a loud, merry, clatter,  His bells echoed loud on the wind; And he and his sleigh, were soon far away,  While his mansion lay far, far, behind. His reindeer were active and nimble,  They bounded in haste through the snow; For short was the night, to take such a flight,  To millions of homes, don't you know. His stay was short in each dwelling,  Where the little ones slept in their beds, And leaving some toys, for the girls and the boys, He 'gan mounted roofs overhead. In some climes the snow had not fallen,  Then what did Old Santa Claus do? Why he yelled to his deer, in a voice shrill and clear; They mounted the air, and they flew. And long 'fore it dawned Christmas morning,  He had made his journey complete; From his three score deer, he took all the gear, And piled them, a heap at his feet. His good wife then gave him a bumper,  Of claret, all sparkling and strong. And she sang him a health, and she wished him wealth; That his life might be happy and long. All weary from hasty exertion,  And a long, long, ride in his sleigh. When the bright dawn did peep, he was sound, sound asleep. And that's how he spent Christmas day.
My love's adorable and wise  As heaven and the winds of spring: Go thou and gaze into her eyes  Such scholars of the starry skies!   Canst marvel at the thing? My love is like a bud that blows  With fragrant honey in its heart: Go, watch her smile Wouldst not suppose She from some warm, white, serious rose  Had learned the happy art? The thoughts she speaks are pearls unstrung  That strew her fancy's golden floor: Go listen For, the woods among, She met with Pan, when very young,  Who taught her all his lore.
<> <> All day I have thought of her: There is nothing left of that year. (There is sere-grass Salt colored.) We have annulled it with Salt. We have galled it clean to the clay with that one autumn: The hedge-rows keep the rubbish and the leaves. There is nothing left of that year in our lives but the leaves of it, As though it had not been at all. As though the love the love and the life altered. Even ourselves are as strangers in these thoughts. Why should I weep for this? What have I brought her? Of sorrow of sorrow of sorrow her heart full. <> <>
By ions or ozone or iodine, light unimpaired from the horizon  how the sea signals itself by an inkling long before the hightide crashes on the ear and pines end in plants splayed and hackled by the seawind is a mystery as though a sea inside were answering exactly with its own miniature lapsing crests wearing away at an interior shore: sometimes just inches sometimes whole towns spirited away in the undertow. Its pebble-chafing, bone-comb undertow. The old edge of Suffolk lies under the sea; Dunwich capsized from the Commonwealth keeps its afterlife of hotels, craftshops, a harmless wry affair, while down the coast the squat domain of Sizewell voids its heat through a pipe into the sea. Sea-anglers dot the foreshore, their rods like the jittery feelers of crayfish or the dials of a Geiger counter. But now the whole heath spreads violet, salt-kissed, tightly curled on its bed of peat where the ling and the bell and the cross-leaved heather cling in dusky mounds to the earth that holds on an edge, the dearer for its vanishing. By the sea's edge I coveted the mermaid's purse (egg-case of the common skate) and the sea-pecked interior shell of the cuttlefish shaped like a balsawood pelvis its ghostly bulk steered through crizzled veils of ink. The low cliffs are fraying, leaving packed layers of peat studded with egg-pale stones exposed like a wall whose verge is held by the frailest weave of marram grass.
To-day, all day, for once he did nothing  A proud report from one whose hands, Of Satan warned when young, engross him Always with over-busyness. Nothing  Pleasure unposted in the journal. This is for eyes that ask no illustration, Not for those poor adepts at less than nothing Who would enquire: Was it town-idleness, Or did he drink the sun by the calm sea Until the sunset washed upon his daze, Then home to supper, and the bedside lamp? He did nothing; tells you plainly so. Where he did nothing is no part of this: Whether by the wild sea or the calm sea Or where the pavement-coloured dog befouls The pavement-kerb. It is enough that He did nothing, neither less nor more, Leaving the day, for a remembrance, A clear bubble in Time's chalky glass.
We take the weight of children in the sun, their heads bobbing from our backs their mouths opening in quick sleep with food for flies at market noon. We take the weight of baskets and clay pots fat with mangoes, printed cloth, and bread. The heat that called us here now burns the road leading home from market talk that takes the weight of indigo and ochre weaves, sales of anklets hammered out of dollars, French francs, or studded with cowries and African gold on ebony skin. We take the weight of languages and signs, commercial English, Dutch, and Portuguese. Words beating from stretched black skin rhyme in Wolof for our songs and dancing to take the weight of children lost to oceans in the North and West. They who once sailed into centuries, who now return in lipstick and with greenback hands.
Anguish is always there, lurking at night, Wakes us like a scourge, the creeping sweat As rage is remembered, self-inflicted blight. What is it in us we have not mastered yet? What Hell have we made of the subtle weaving Of nerve with brain, that all centers tear? We live in a dark complex of rage and grieving. The machine grates, grates, whatever we are. The kingdom of Kali is within us deep. The built-in destroyer, the savage goddess, Wakes in the dark and takes away our sleep. She moves through the blood to poison gentleness. She keeps us from being what we long to be; Tenderness withers under her iron laws. We may hold her like a lunatic, but it is she Held down, who bloodies with her claws. How then to set her free or come to terms With the volcano itself, the fierce power Erupting injuries, shrieking alarms? Kali among her skulls must have her hour. It is time for the invocation, to atone For what we fear most and have not dared to face: Kali, the destroyer, cannot be overthrown; We must stay, open-eyed, in the terrible place. Every creation is born out of the dark. Every birth is bloody. Something gets torn. Kali is there to do her sovereign work Or else the living child will be stillborn. She cannot be cast out (she is here for good) Nor battled to the end. Who wins that war? She cannot be forgotten, jailed, or killed. Heaven must still be balanced against her. Out of destruction she comes to wrest The juice from the cactus, its harsh spine, And until she, the destroyer, has been blest, There will be no child, no flower, and no wine.
In the center of the photograph, not dead center, but a little above and to the left, there's the implacable black eye of a lovely, at least twenty-inch, rainbow trout. The sun high, the lake calm. Snow on the mountains in the distance. June. Montana. That long gone sun shining now on the ferrule and guides of a good rod, the copper buttons of a denim coat, the tubular aluminum legs of a folding chair, the silver belly of trout. And that eye, like a black planet at one end of the Milky Way all trout carry on their backs. In the photograph the sun is shining on the forehead of the balding smiling man holding that big rainbow respectfully, lovingly, in his hand.
Are you a poet?   Yes, I am. How do you know?   I've written poems. If you've written poems it means you were a poet. But now?   I'll write a poem again one day. In that case maybe you'll be a poet again one day. But how will you know it is a poem?   It will be a poem just like the last one. Then of course it won't be a poem. A poem is only once and can never be the same a second time.   I believe it will be just as good. How can you be sure? Even the quality of a poem is for once only and depends not on you but on circumstances.   I believe that circumstances will be the same too. If you believe that then you won't be a poet and never were a poet. What makes you think you are a poet?   Well I don't rightly know. And who are you?
A sleepy people, without priests or kings, Dreamed here, men say, to drive us to the sea:  O let us drive ourselves! For it is free And smells of honour and of English things. How came we brawling by these bitter springs,  We of the North? two kindly nations we? Though the dice rattles and the clear coin rings,  Hear is no place for living men to be. Leave them the gold that worked and whined for it,  Let them that have no nation anywhere Be native here, and fat and full of bread; But we, whose sins were human, we will quit  The land of blood, and leave these vultures there, Noiselessly happy, feeding on the dead.
Often he reappears now In dreams, in a chill half-light, Surfacing from the distance As from a dark corridor, Gesturing with his pale hands. He stands on a deck, waiting. As though in a photograph, It is the same pose always. The image is blurred, and he Seems unaware of the cold, Secretive life assembling Outside the bottom edge of The picture, submerged, hushed like A reef expecting its ship, His body preserved each time.
Surf is a partial deafness islanders All suffer from, committed to the land; A resonant hades, traversing, the fathers Left cold or sweltering a world behind; A drumming, drumming, drumming till there leapt Fully afforested from the well of ocean Valley and peak; the glove of blindness clapped On trusting eyes; perpetual collision Indistinguishable in those eyes, Of salt of tears within and spray without; Currents not warm or cold, of abstract seas By any sense unfathomed, but where float Small gods in shawls of bark, blind, numb, and deaf, But buoyant, eastward in the blaze of surf.
It's three o'clock New Year's morning and snowing a little outside the frazzled bright empty dreamscape of the blue Dayton airport ... It seems we've missed our last connection  no limousine, no minibus a flagpole somewhere clanking in the wind ... the whole surly crowd of calamitous flight 1066 sans luggage, milling around on the sidewalk, looking for someone to talk to the moron in charge here a taxi for Christsake to take us to our hotel. Then the lights go out and someone's dazed, dead on his feet six year old decides to lie down now and sleep on the cement like a sudden flashback to some forgotten war ... No one can leave the city. Anyone out after curfew excepting military personnel and selectees for transport will be shot on sight  children will be shot and somewhere, a flagpole might rattle in the wind or a train might whistle it's light coming toward us like the light at the end of our dark millennium.
Where the angels of the six directions &amp; thirty-six mirrors experiment on us as their food: four ovens, twenty-two chimneys but only one fire cooks our meat. Larks purr, a nihtegall in a black iron pot sings in the old language: <> <> <> <> I mean the nightingale. I mean the lark. I mean the food we are in the kitchen it is. I mean the angels devour our meat &amp; sing. I mean the old language is not heard from any human throat <> <> <> <>
The sun sets in a wall that holds the sky. You'll not be here long, maybe. The window filled with reflections turns on its pivot; beyond its edge the air goes on cold and deep; your hand feels it, or mine, or both; it's the same air for ever. Now reach across the dark. Now touch the mountain.
Stout bollards and red cones provide corrals for visitors of curiosity and distinction. The bunting flies in bright but tasteful pastels. Cool awnings wait for any faint observers. The ritual of Trampling on the People is annual, public, ancient, and instructive, and draws large throngs into the Square of Squares for reasons imaginable and unimaginable. All traffic is forbidden, and a thousand citizens from the peripheral favelas lie prostrate and quite naked on the asphalt with stiff arms by their sides. The heat beats fiercely. A hundred of the great ones of the region, some dripping with imperial insignia, some plainly suited in grey polyester, some few with masks, though that was hardly needful, and all smart-booted, cuban-heedled, spurred, studded, descend from their ungaudy valanced platform. A midday cannon galvanized the phalanx to strut along the backs the high sun offered, crisscrossing in the carefullest formation till none escaped the heel and the dispassion which ground knees, bellies, nipples, lips, and foreheads briefly into the stony earth they came from. At a command, the tramplers regained their dais. A further cannon-shot, and the bruised beings stumbled erect in silence, and dispersing into the streets and avenues with neither clothes nor shame at lack of them, gave nature more than human power had dispossessed there, while jaunty music froze our very spirit into vows that set like iron, and bound us.
&ldquo;Cada puerco tiene su sabado,&rdquo; Guadalupe would say. Every pig has his Saturday. Guadalupe remembered a Saturday in Puerto Rico, when his uncle Chungo clanked a pipe across the skull of a shrieking pig, wrestled the staggering blood-slick beast before the flinching children. Chungo set the carcass ablaze to burn the bristles off the skin. Guadalupe dreamt for years about the flaming pig. Of his uncle, he would only say: &ldquo;Cada puerco tiene su sabado.&rdquo; And Chungo died, diving into the ocean, an artery bursting in his head. I remember a Saturday on Long Island, when my father dug a pit for the pig roast, and neighbors spoke prophecy of dark invasion beneath the growl of lawnmowers. I delivered the suckling pig, thirty pounds in my arms, cradled in a plastic bag with trotters protruding and flies bouncing off the snout, skinned by a farmer who did not know the crunch of cuero. My father cursed the lost skin, cursed the rain filling the pit, cursed the oven too small for the pig, cursed the pig he beheaded on the kitchen counter, cursed his friends who left before the pig was brown. Amid the dented beer cans leaning back to back, I stayed with my cursing father. I was his accomplice; witnesses in doorways saw me carrying the body through the streets. I ate the pig too, jaw grinding thick pork like an outfielder's tobacco. The farmer told me the pig's name: Ichabod. Cada puerco tiene su sabado.
<> Your early poverty You drop deliberately As voided bill. The view is pleasant: garden, daughters grown, Tall son with college degree, Grandchildren twining like ivy round the house. Sunday dinner gowned in golden butter. Thank God for family health. And could solve the world's ills With second portion. Would hide the word  Tuck team into bed. Unread, Your hands are scholarly with love.
Somewhere across the bed in the dark she is less and less beautiful. He rids her face of candlelight's easy romance. He hardens her too-soft cheeks, her bright eyes. He refuses to let memories gutter like sweet, old wax. In the hard light of the searchlights because he set fire to their house he finds her. Deep in ashes, in fragments of glass. Her eyelashes are painted black. The scratch of a match would wake her. At dawn the woman he ruins has kept her familiar face, those same brown eyes. Their son waking in the next room cries the hard slap of a dream.
When is a man not a man? When he's a gentleman. The funny thing about a gentleman  And by gentleman I mean that ubiquitous Englishman Who considers himself a gentleman   He considers himself such, if you please  Is that he doesn't seem to have any inside to him. He has a very nice apple-of-Sodom rind  Fresh, clean, well-groomed Englishman  And on the surface shell of him He has fresh, clean, well-groomed emotions Opinions, ideas, and so forth Quite the fresh, clean, manly fellow. But poke him a little And you stir up the most amazing mud. All his emotions, his feelings that are not superficial and  well-groomed Are an amazing putrescent slush. He's like a bonny, rosy sea-crab with healthy claws Full inside of weird brown slushy crab-meat Carrion-greedy in its sensations. But what I would like to know Is where does it come from, this lovely English voice Whooing and cooing and fading away with wonderful  genteel deprecation? Wherever is it produced? This manly voice? It has neither heart nor bowels nor genitals. Even its brain seems upside down. But it has front-teeth And a goo-goo sort of voice-box. The lovely English voice. It seems to come out of some hollow rind of a man.
Gammon to Spinach, Kentucky to Greenwich, &lsquo;Neither have I met you, Nor can I forget you While the world's round.&rsquo; Spinach in reply, &lsquo;Fool! but more fool I. Neither do I know you Nor shall I forgo you. Here's occasion found For a graver meeting For a blunter greeting Spinach with Gammon, Jacksnipe with Salmon In the deserts of Ammon Thus to live nearly, Thus to love dearly On unexplored ground.&rsquo;
I came to a field Where the grass was silence And flowers Words I saw they were both Of flesh and blood And that they sense and fear The wind like a knife So I sat between the word  And the word  Took out my small cauldron And ladle Whistled to the word  And she answered me From her sleep Spat in the palm of my hand To catch the stars Behind my back And light her way
Nothing's sadder than my sister's grave unless it's the grave of my cousin, next to her. To this day, I can't bring myself to watch my aunt and my mother, though the more I try to escape seeing their suffering, the more it seems the fate of our family: each branch donates one girl child to the earth. In my generation, we put off marrying, put off having children. When we did have them, we each had one; for the most part, we had sons, not daughters. We don't discuss this ever. But it's always a relief to bury an adult, someone remote, like my father. It's a sign that maybe the debt's finally been paid. In fact, no one believes this. Like the earth itself, every stone here is dedicated to the Jewish god who doesn't hesitate to take a son from a mother.
Sacred fountain, let me find at the genesis of our kind some consolation of the mind. On this dark November morning the aureola of the dawn like a golden child is born so this day takes its origin from impulses that begin beyond the star we suffer in and the babe steps from a cloud where, before the heart's endowed with all that's miserable, or proud, there all creatures fraternize and find in one another's eyes the innocence that always dies. This is that welcome of the stars the lost and drowning sailor hears like angels whistling at his ears or the weeping caryatid bowing down its heavy head burdened with what it never did: in the astrologies of night they see that death is growing bright with stars that never reach our sight. And the cherubs of the day redeem in their sacred play the nightmare of our Succubae as the infant of the breast brings to those who cannot rest the peace we had thought dispossessed. It is the death of innocence the cherubim of birth announce on the trumpets of existence.
Pardon, old fathers, if you still remain Somewhere in ear-shot for the story's end, Old Dublin merchant &lsquo;free of the ten and four&rsquo; Or trading out of Galway into Spain; Old country scholar, Robert Emmet's friend, A hundred-year-old memory to the poor; Merchant and scholar who have left me blood That has not passed through any huckster's loin, Soldiers that gave, whatever die was cast: A Butler or an Armstrong that withstood Beside the brackish waters of the Boyne James and his Irish when the Dutchman crossed; Old merchant skipper that leaped overboard After a ragged hat in Biscay Bay; You most of all, silent and fierce old man, Because the daily spectacle that stirred My fancy, and set my boyish lips to say, &lsquo;Only the wasteful virtues earn the sun&rsquo;; Pardon that for a barren passion's sake, Although I have come close on forty-nine, I have no child, I have nothing but a book, Nothing but that to prove your blood and mine.
In my mind your woodstove's heat diffuses through the kitchen's flume February mornings, the children waking like fresh life to its call. Here the matchheads, purple and blue in the frozen grass, are crocuses, and I have been recalling us talking one night beside that spirit, your house's heart. What else but love. When I was five, my grandfather strapped on roller skates. Feet a perfect quarter- till-three, he circled the basement drain. Remember giving in to the world's pitch? Last night you called, grief refined through microchips. I held your words: One daughter's friend, dressed prettily, her soupbowl in both hands, stood to warm her legs close to the black enabler. You turned to see her explode in flames, your own long hair on fire before you rolled her with her burns into the kitchen rug. A roomful of people, paralyzed, watched the mother act. What rhetoric lacks: this equation balanced so that balance equals beauty. Today I kneel with you, our wire brush scraping skin and blood from oak grain. We've had enough of damage but it needs us. Did I tell you, at his funeral's close, there were only debts? The first young man whose hands explore the burned girl's back will feel what that meant, tricked by courage. Sister, unlike fire's breach of promise, heat is familiar. Its green star takes a bite of us every time we breathe.
Once when, like birds, we feared the hunter's gun Yet saw no enemy anywhere, Lord, was our neck not in the hunter's snare? How can we count the times we nearly died By trickery, in the peaceful trees? We played in places made for our destruction, Flew in and out the little windows set, we thought, To be our special, safe resort. We planned our fortunes in an open trap. Led by our recklessness into the nets, Taking the bait, and slipping through the strings, Who saved us, in the places that we thought were safe? Oh, though you'll seem to lose all sight of hiding thongs, Poor blindness rest, and weakness smile: For while, yourselves, you'd never find them, Fold up your fear of them in heavenly Communion! Then we'll be free of all the knots that try to tie us. The sliding loop, the flying spring catch us no more than air. We shall have died to them before they ever thought of us, So fast our feet, now clumsy, and most full of clay, Become when Jesus' grace has made them heavenly.
Make me well, I said. And the delighted touch. You put dead sweet hand on my dead brain. The window cleared and the night-street stood black. As soon as I left your house others besieged me forcing my motion, saying, Make me well. Took sickness into the immense street, but nothing was thrivingI saw blank lightthe crazy blink of torturethe lackand there is no personal sickness strong to intrude there. Returned. Stood at the window. Make me well. Cannot? The white sea, which is inviolable, is no greater, the disallied world's unable, daylight horizons of lakes cannot caress me well. The hypocrite leper in the parable, did he believe would be kissed whole by kisses? I'll try beyond you now. I'll try all flame. Some force must be whole, some eye inviolable  look, here I am returned! No help. Gone high again; legend's no precedent. This perseveres. The sun, I say, sincere, the sun, the sun.
These are the women walking and walking hopelessly the promised streets. Gazing back at shopwindows and bloody meats cellophaned at their fingertips, hoarding all their stamps, receipts, and memories of weekend trips, these are the women walking. These are the men, their husbands, working, crediting their daily lives and nightly dying. Into the sad calm of their wives they press the automatic seed, investing in the sheltered womb that craves her startling daughter-Queen, his son-King. These are the men and women, getting and spending. Who are the children born and bearing all the generations of desire?
 GON splashes-sink which is east eighth,a star of three annoys me,but the stink of perfumed noise fiercely mounts from the fireman's ball,i think and also i think of you,getting mandolin-clink mixed with your hair;feeling your knees among the supercilious chimneys, my nerves sumptuously wink ....and little-dusk has his toys to play with windows-and-whispers, (will BigMorning get away with them?j'm'en doute,) ch&eacute;rie,j'm'en doute.  You, in this window sits a Face (it is twilight)a Face playing on a flute
Absorbed in planting bulbs, that work of hope, I was surprised by a loud human voice, &ldquo;Do go on working while we talk. Don't stop!&rdquo; And I was caught upon the difficult choice  To yield the last half-hour of precious light, Or to stay on my knees, absurd and rude. I willed her to be gone with all my might, This kindly neighbor who destroyed a mood. I could not think of next spring any more; I had to reassess the way I live. Long after I went in and closed the door I pondered on the crude imperative. What it is to be caught up in each day Like a child fighting imaginary wars, Converting work into this passionate play, A rounded whole made up of different chores Which one might call haphazard meditation. And yet an unexpected call destroys Or puts to rout my primitive elation. Why be so serious about mere joys? Is this where some outmoded madness lies, Poet as recluse? No, what comes to me Is how my father looked out of his eyes, And how he fought for his own passionate play. He could tear up unread and throw away Communications from officialdom, And, courteous in every other way, Would not brook anything that kept him from Those lively dialogues with man's whole past That were his intimate and fruitful pleasure. Impetuous, impatient to the last, &ldquo;Be adamant, keep clear, strike for your treasure!&rdquo; I hear the youthful ardor in his voice (And so I can forgive a self in labor). I feel his unrepentant, smiling choice (And so must ask indulgence of my neighbor).
Mother as a young girl sixty years back, fair daughter of hope, helpless as an apple blossom, now dead, now studied by the granddaughter who looks most like her and sees in that face the face of a little sister who still has to learn the facts of life. Now, the boys cry, O now! but the next thing she knows, her bed is falling through moths and layers of shadow each more black mother, sister, soul, O soft little mouth opened to the mute zero of wonder.
I even I am he who knoweth the roads Thru the sky and the wind thereof is my body. I have beheld the Lady of Life. I, even I, that fly with the swallows. Green and grey is her raiment Trailing along the wind. I even I am he who knoweth the roads Thru the sky and the wind thereof is my body. <> My pen is in my hand To write the acceptable word, My mouth to chaunt the pure singing: Who hath the mouth to receive it? The Song of the Lotus of Kumi? I even I ran he who knoweth the roads Thru the sky and the wind thereof is my body. I am flame that riseth in the sun, I, even I, that fly with the swallows For the moon is upon my forehead, The winds are under my kiss. The moon is a great pearl in the waters of sapphire; Cool to my fingers the flowing waters. I even I am he who knoweth the roads Of the sky and the wind thereof is my body. I will return unto the halls of the flowing Of the truth of the children of Ashu. I even I am he who knoweth the roads Of the sky and the wind thereof is my body.
&ldquo; The cattle men sell and buy, Crowded upon the fair green, Low to the lightless sky. &ldquo;Live,&rdquo; &ldquo;live,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Here,&rdquo; &ldquo;here,&rdquo; the blackbird From the top of the bare ash-tree, Over the acres whistles With beak of yellow blee. And climbing, turning, and climbing His little stair of sound, &ldquo;Content,&rdquo; &ldquo;content,&rdquo; from the low hedge The redbreast sings in a round. And I who hear that hedge-song Will fare with all the rest, With thoughts of lust and labour, And bargain in my breast. The bare hedge bright with rain-drops That have not fallen down, The golden-crowded whin-bush  Nor know these things my own!
As a boy awake in bed with a mum's kiss He wipes can clearly see the wedge of light He needs will thin away from him, the darkness Falls on the uncomprehending. Night Swallows this observation, and this male, Curled and sailing farther than it felt Possible away from what felt whole, Is stretching for a handhold on the world. The Rio Negro, nothing for a view, Its banks in blackness like whatever things Nor and Neither are referring to, Bats my breath away with its slow wings. Too weak to say I miss you, I've about The scope of what I started with, the sliver Of matter immaterial without What plumps for it in just so dark a river. I'm glad you saw me. Now you'd see me shift Gingerly to stem to watch a sky Stubbed by that hot city that we left Ten hours ago. I'm glad you caught my eye. Macaws I saw stay in the mind. They soared And tilted in the least of the old light Over the treetops. If you see this bird Among us it's been scissored from the mate It would have flown beside for sixty years. My cabin-window's black as the reply Of rivers to the I and its ideas, Eroding them to barely one, but I At least am moving, like the Rio Negro, Somewhere coming helplessly to light, And even nothing, signing itself zero, Is paying homage like a satellite.
how wasdid it rain last nightpuddle walk beside grassblades reflecting like a national park and a sparrow sipping away locale is the sky partly mirror sure yes new thing wild contradiction without any cloud what a viewlong as it stays though the trees move and is there some division the phonepole next door to the chimney sizable too
Only parts of the pain of living may be captured in a poem or tale or song or in the image seen. Even in life we only halfway feel the tears of a brother or sister, mass disenchantment in cities, our discovery of love's meagerness, the slow rise and fall of the sun. Sadness is the theme of existence; joy its variations. Pain is only a portion of sadness, and efforts to escape it can lead to self-destruction, one aspect of pain lived imaginatively. It is in life that we celebrate pain; It is in art that we imitate it, Beauty is saddening, or, as the man sings, &ldquo;The bitter note makes the song so sweet.&rdquo;
They could not carry much, as soldiers. There was no past in their forgetting, No self in the mass: the braver being, The body that could never be wounded, The life that never would end, no matter Who died, the being that was an abstraction, A giant's heart in the veins, all courage. But to strip off the complacent trifles, To expel the ever-present seductions, To reject the script for its lack-tragic, To confront with plainest eye the changes, That was to look on what war magnified. It was increased, enlarged, made simple, Made single, made one. This was not denial. Each man himself became a giant, Tipped out with largeness, bearing the heavy And the high, receiving out of others, As from an inhuman elevation And origin, an inhuman person, A mask, a spirit, an accoutrement. For soldiers, the new moon stretches twenty feet.
As if the stars were grinding audibly, I wake scarcely an hour into the sleep entered after watching a cottony snow slick the road. All night words stacked in my head remembering until I believed once again the swirled faces of the dead were calling. The dog at my feet growled himself awake, shook, slept. I climbed the tall stairs to bed and fell down. Summoned, I do not know what startles out of me this need to walk bareheaded in the budding village, but only a block of darkness off a fire is dying. Trucks with wide red lights wink and rumble. A few men in black shrouds coil hoses that seem to net the shining street. Midway between this and my house I begin to feel invisible as the whitetail buck who, blinded by age, stumbled in this winter. Two or three watched him until the way out fell back in his head, leading him where children could not help his legs leap again in their sleep. When I look back at the room where I lived a flaring comes with leaf-shadows on her face as she discovers I am gone. The dog barks on the porch. Nobody means to do this, to lie in the village green, but the earth around me is cool, wet, as if it had just been birthed. All I want is to stand at the top of the stairs once more, the hall light yellowing the foreheads of my children while I try to say softer than the brightest star, Goodbye. Goodbye.
The summer grows late, cool, ragged, precious. Clouds like ungainly brooms are sweeping showers across the slates. On a dripping lamp-standard a crow hunches, flaps, hunches. The young painter with his tin of white sings as he hops in and out of the rain. The sun bursts what it has been saving so suddenly, so brilliantly, we are smiling. It is August still. The leaves hang fast and glisten. If there were no seasons, who would be singing? If there was no weather, who would be painting? If there was no earth turning, we darkly, partly think, no crow would have a lawn to stamp on, or Aristarchus any globe to dandle. As not to be born is worst a crow will tell you, a worm will tell you not to be created crosses galaxies like a shadow of horror. But created they are; born, I and the painter; really wet ruffled shiny black half-happy the feathers of the raucous-hearted clatterer.
Christmas Eve, unseasonably cold, I walk in Golden Gate Park. The winter twilight thickens. The park grows dusky before The usual hour. The sky Sinks close to the shadowy Trees, and sky and trees mingle In receding planes of vagueness. The wet pebbles on the path Wear little frills of ice like Minute, transparent fungus. Suddenly the air is full Of snowflakes cold, white, downy Feathers that do not seem to Come from the sky but crystallize Out of the air. The snow is Unendurably beautiful, Falling in the breathless lake, Floating in the yellow rushes. I cannot feel the motion Of the air, but it makes a sound In the rushes, and the snow Falling through their weaving blades Makes another sound. I stand still, Breathing as gently as I can, And listen to these two sounds, And watch the web of frail wavering Motion until it is almost night. I walk back along the lake path Pure white with the new snow. Far out Into the dusk the unmoving Water is drinking the snow. Out of the thicket of winter Cattails, almost at my feet, Thundering and stamping his wings, A huge white swan plunges away. He breaks out of the tangle, And floats suspended on gloom. Only his invisible Black feet move in the cold water. He floats away into the dark, Until he is a white blur Like a face lost in the night, And then he is gone. All the world Is quiet and motionless Except for the fall and whisper Of snow. There is nothing but night, And the snow and the odor Of the frosty water.
Awake, you wonder how to turn, if your muscles will obey your wishes, or if the porcelain bones, thinning with each breath, have grown insupportable overnight. At the sink, you pencil in your eyebrows  mindful of your steady hand, even here in elderly housing, where the dispossessed have lost memory, that transparent muscle. On Broad Street, trolleys screech and wheeze like frail men at the back of the synagogue. Powder. Lipstick. Rouge. You buckle the brace that trusses your torso like a dancing partner. Across the hall, Mr. Weiss fumbles for his keys. You hear the knock of his metal walker, three rubber shoes striking the floor in a waltz step. Now you may join the others in the clamorous dining hall. Already they are pulling out their chairs, preparing to recite the blessing before the meal.
The elegance of the 2-bit hustler who pulled off a dangerous caper keeping a rendezvous with Dr. Snuff all to win a silver star with which to decorate the night sky  his whole collection pasted there on the ceiling of the cold bedroom of his lover  is very probably spurious Nevertheless the struggle toward freedom  O fallen angel of the moon whose passions fill my notebook of foolish behaviors  is one I will act out forever
I have been so great a hater: found my days Filled full of things deserving hate's high praise And homage. Oh, I that have learned to hate Shall never want for pleasure; soon or late, I'll find things hateful while I have my breath. And when I die, I'll bite my thumb at Death. But that's anon. I now must set you down Things that I have hated: A certain shade of brown Which elder ladies love; wet roofs that drip Their huge drops on your neck; short sheets that slip And leave your ankles freezing; fires that smoke; Carved, heavy furniture of varnished oak; The food of farmers, and their stupid talk; The feel of live wet fur; the shriek of chalk; The hum of Autumn's gnats; smell of closed rooms, And the rank breath of heavy dahlia blooms Kept three days longer than they should have been; White cups and plates, almost but not quite clean; Lust in old men, coldness in the young; Cheap love-songs and the tunes to which they're sung; White moths which feast through long autumnal eves In chests and closets; books with uncut leaves; The hour of waking; late-seen gibbous moons; And sugar in which dull people thrust wet spoons; The loneliness of crowds, and the warm fret Of April nights when the fresh grasses set Youth and desire, night and still sleep at strife ... Death I have hated and, sometimes, even Life. All these which I have known, kept, hated well, I would set down, unchanged, unchangeable, Against that hour when I shall lightly run Along the windy pathways of the sun, A strangely free and unannoyed ghost, And start and turn and, finding I have lost All these my treasured hatreds, bow my head And tremble, knowing at length that I am dead.
<>  or smoke or blow. It's the junction of minor and major roads. Its amber's  neither stop nor go. It's the bitten amber mouthpiece of the unsmoked  meerschaum in the pipe-rack. It's the tin of   you prise its blue lid and the vac- Uum escapes; it's the pungent, urgent, aromatic whiff  of nicotine. I unblossomed it and rubbed it. I tamped it down into  the bowl. I lit it with a  You remember those old-fashioned lucifers that came  in a yellow matchwood box? The sulphur, bulbous, rose-bud red of their tips?  You know, the equinox Of when we talked, and you were smoking Passing Clouds?  That  It was called? The silly names we gave each other?  No? &lsquo;The Twelfth of Never&rsquo;?
If now you cannot hear me, it is because your thoughts are held by sounds of destiny or turn perhaps to darkness, magnetized, as a doomed ship upon the Manacles is drawn to end its wandering and down into the stillness under rock and wave to lower its bright figurehead; or else you never heard me, only listening to that implicit question in the shade, duplicity that gnaws the roots of love. If now I cannot see you, or be sure you ever stirred beyond the walls of dream, rising, unbroken battlements, to a sky heavy with constellations of desire, it is because those barricades are grown too tall to scale, too dense to penetrate, hiding the landscape of your distant life in which you move, as birds in evening air far beyond sight trouble the darkening sea with the low piping of their discontent.
<> Silence of locks. Out of the mouths of leaf No moths rise the mind to itself mining, The land over it long gone. And when at evening, desiring: The emptying sacks of dusk over shoulder, The divulged handful, The best flung like a goose's stars; I fear the reveal of moon  Three-corner face, the sharpener. So that Hamlet's divided dream would seem the sweet Of murder by sea, Not this mirroring, leaf by leaf, The memory, and no scenery. Think, think Egypt, Egypt in flood. The bears hid, the figure without a back Falling face forward, And they knew what it was attached them like crabs, Neither cancer nor cold, But Fear. Disaster, flower, comforter. I think there might be something for me again in those nights, Those hammers of dug stars. Down by the flood last night I dreamed again The water's weed waving; At midnight the wings lengthen, The moon in the head Faces its equal. Out of this rainful, black, mud-running season The last of the twelve selves Becomes a river  Reality the monster rides the rains: O man of stone, I remember your half-acre walk, I encounter What's started, what's elected, what's coming with rain on stilts to make Its raid, its wreck, its trust, its tribe, its number.
i have been drunk since summer, sure you would come to sift the waves until they flaked like diamonds over our flanks. i have not moved. even when wild horses, with snouts like pigs came to violate me, i squatted in my baptism. O hear the sea galloping like stallions toward spring.
 I loved Actress-As-Cat. And if you'd seen her ordering the special and hoping to enjoy it, or thinking back and trying to remember my old friends,  or if you'd seen her look  and offer you a light, or known her middle name and laughed at it, you wouldn't say I was confessing things, you'd say &lsquo;Of course. Doesn't everyone.&rsquo;  You'd say &lsquo;Get out. Get out,  you love Actress-As-Cat! No, I don't love her, no, but I don't love. Get out! you'd say. There'd be no mystery. I'd know your jealousy. I'd see your car  in town but know the truth:  You lost Actress-As-Cat. You did that, did that, while I'm the one smiling at ten o'clock, not telling which ten o'clock, but telling her alone.  And then elevenses.  I love Actress-As-Cat. You never had a hope, or if you did it's all you had, and she prefers her meals with gentlemen like me. Yes, I believe  I was the kind of man  made for Actress-As-Cat, the kind she meant when she turned and looked down along the Downs that Sunday afternoon and was sorry. I mean she really was.  We drove back in the car,  Actress-As-Cat and me. You'd have been quiet too, to see her eyes run clean out of depth, all bright and reading my poem and praising it. And her hands hers.  And her soft new word:
When they escaped They carried a pack of bones In a mummy-coffin like an ark. Of course they had the pillar Of clouds by day and fire by night, But those were like dreams Or something painted on the sky. God was in the bones Because he had said, God will remember you If you take me hence. This was before the miracle By the sea or the thundering mountain, Before the time of thrones And cherubim. They were Only now drawn forth To eat the history feast And begin the journey. Why then should they carry history Like an ark, and the remembering Already begun?
Boys on the top board too high to catch. Noon is painting them out. Where the willow swans on the quarry edge they tan and sweat in the place of divers with covered nipples  Olympians, that was the way of it. Boys in the breeze on the top board where the willow burns golden and green on feet grappling  boys fooling shoulder to shoulder, light shaking. The lake's in shadow, the day's cooling, time to come down  they stub their heels on the sun then pike-dive out of its palm.
I learned this from the old: odor of lake and crayola, odor of grave. Cycle completed and locked. And that was another air, the one with glittering kites, the one glittering music from the dancehall rode across the lake. Isn't it time again for the band to assemble, trumpet to sparkle, drum to knock like a heart? And isn't it time for dark women to jitter through evening like bats, barely missing, barely nicking the lake? Or should the first kiss be the last, life from then on lonely promise in the reeds where water tries to lap but soft moss muffles the wash? The blackbird offers no red wing of friendship under the chilling cloud. Now, when I sketch a perch and get the wrong green on his rib no preacher hounds me to correct the color. And empty days like these are full of time to stare the color real until the perch slips off the sketchpad into the lake and darts for sedge. Bubbles of his going bloom along the surface. They give off definite odors hermits remember well.
Cold. Black life lain Open for his brothers. Perpetual Sustenance waiting To kill neglect in the fearful. Served. The uncovered lie Submerged under the cubes of atonement. Redemption. Black humanity hanging On the frozen words of a black martyr. Life. Black sons/men. Leading a family from hell. Eternal. Human history defeats human Inflicted miseries. Black beauty Born of a true patroit. All black hearts crave For chased animosities.
a sentimental curator has placed two fragments of bronze Grecian heads together boy and girl so that the faces black- ened by the three thousand years of desert sand &amp; sun seem to be whispering something that the Gurgan lion &amp; the wing- ed dog of Azerbaijan must not hear but I have heard them as I hear you now half way around the world so simply &amp; so quietly more like a child than like a woman making love say to me in that soft lost near and distant voice I'm happy now I'm happy oh don't move don't go away.
<> An old time love withered, in seeing, off and on in a thing like rain (the wetness in your head, and all the stampeding, fear, hacked open skulls grinning sensing your loss, the words floating just beyond your fingers (invisible antennae Just drew a blank, dope nod corrupting what's left, and that nothing confusion of blankness, the hatred when I wake silence for motives, she, woman I am with, is silent, as the dream of some other woman, never existed, tho she be of flesh and red sperm spinning through her veins. This woman came when I stuck her iron insect screams holes. Blood flew up into the dropper, we sent it back in her. Eyes rolled up, lap quivered, lip shook. The next time she got depressed going cross town. She held me so. Not understanding the buildings stopped, and sky hung above them just the same
How wise of our enemy to rely upon the watchers. Wired without nerves, controlled from tall Skeletons of electromagnetic steel, They are dangerous without risk to themselves. They envisage no distinction, anticipate no destruction. They are not alive. Yet they have ears and eyes No rustle escapes, no flicker misses. They hover at a level above breathable air, But are also near. In our shoes and curtains. In our pillows. In our spoons. Even when we say nothing, what passes in our brains Is traced in encephalogram by their ticking. We are aware of them when we make love. And because they are unapproachable through anguish, Inaccessible to madness as to argument, We are more afraid of them than of the holocaust. Yet, hating and fearing them as we do, It is curious how often we are exhilarated. It's as if we had acquired new souls. Have we forgotten how to be bored? Are we delivered forever from loneliness? Are we worthy, we wonder, of the marvel of such attention?
The mythology of a species: Jesus Christ? Muhamad? But only the wind is real. We have tried personalising it as divine breath, but the answer of the universe is &lsquo;OM! OM!&rsquo; I have visited the nurseries, seen childhood revelling among tame toys. Outside were the stars that made shapes before language began. The scientists teach the possibility of thinking without words. Their god is the old nameless god of calculus and inertia. I understand rounded space, time that is irreversible. I have wakened in the night, my hair rising at the passing of presences that were not human; switched on the light on articles and upholstery, and switched it as soon off in preference for the dark places to the certainty of our domestication.
They crowd near. If you look at them they look down. Pause. They shuffle their feet. Over near the windows along one side patches of light shine on the floor. It is almost the hour to begin whatever comes after this day. Over their heads you see so many clouds and stars and days. A hook begins to come down from the sky. If you call out, if you warn them, what good will that do? It is the long moment that always opens at such times. Now the eyes turn away. A new high-pitched hum has compelled the others to look around. What happens next? You look toward the exit; this isn't your place any more. It was coming; now it is here, the call. Not for them  For you. It is for you.
Defrocked camellias, their discarded skirts rotting in unceremonious heaps  <> <> <> the almond blossom ... I suggest the song of a lorikeet cast like a net through the deadwood of spent trees, I suggest the area closed off because of dangerous chemicals, I suggest the solitary catboat, its limp sail a premonition, a marooned pilotless ferry on the distant bank. Crossing the wall of the small pipehead a child crouches to view the waters, through the space between fence and concrete the green mesh confusing the picture, preventing pure vision. I trace the lime-sweat tributaries: spread like bruised capillaries they broach the hairline cracks of the walkway. I admire the lichen welding the walls: no talus-creep, these rocks have fallen neatly into place, though the position of hills and filtered river is by chance.
This is your own lover, Kenneth, Marie, Who someday will be part of the earth Beneath your feet; who crowned you once with roses Of song; whose voice was no less famous Raised against the guilt of his generation. Sweetly in Hell he'll tell your story To the enraptured ears of Helen, Our joys and jealousies, our quarrels and journeys, That unlike hers, ended in kisses. Her spouse will smile at impetuous Paris When he hears the tale of our sweet lust. Laura and Petrarca, Waller and his Rose, Grim Dante and glowing Beatrice, Catullus and Lesbia, and all the rest, Transparent hand in hand, will listen, A tremor on their shadowy flesh once more. And when at last I welcome you there Your name will stand for memory of living On the tongues of all whom death has joined. You shall know this when you see my grave snowless Winter long, and my cold sleepfellows Shifting themselves underground to warm Dead bones at my still glowing ashes.
Know the date by the dirt on it. Were we ever not too tired to protest the sad machine we sweat to run? Were we ever? There is a football field on which a better game is played. The geometers assemble with their cones &amp; pies &amp; sit down with geometresses, medr&eacute;sses, matrices for their lunch. Above them three sparrow hawks tow a campaign promise: <> Lions are roaring with finite appetites. <> from heaven &amp; is measured. Their lips (only the humans have lips in this picture) are plumb-lines that measure war. They talk. How close they are, sitting in their forms like rabbits. They are conscious of little but what goes on in the associative echo-chambers of their endless thought, hence conscious of nought. Steam-powered floats come up the sand bearing peonies from Alexandria. The driver is a woman who seems uncomfortable in daylight who is she? The geometers realigned their strings. <> <> A dog-like thing runs to question them: Who is she exactly? What is the proportion of a sphere to the cylinder it's scribbled in? (The Cynomorph is a classifier. You count in him.) The people speak.  <> convulsed with cloud does time run back? There is silence in Gethsemani.  <> But only the language has lips.
The planets move, and earth is one, I know. Blue with endlessly moving seas, white with clouds endlessly moving, and the continents creep on plates endlessly moving soundlessly. How should we be exempt or safe from change, we walk on mercury from birth to death. A face comes through the crowd, lips move, new eyes, and the house of roots trembles, its doors are slack, its windows yawn, a place not known to be defenceless undefended. Who wants sedge at the streak of the kingfisher? Now you have almost worn out my tape of &lsquo;The Planets&rsquo;, but I don't know yours, or your sign, though Mars the Bringer of War is what you play most. We've talked of Jenghiz Khan, of Christ, of Frankenstein. I don't know whether you believe in the fate I can't not believe in, simply to watch you swinging in my black vinyl chair, even bringing war.
Now, it is night and time for sleep. Everyone is tired from garbage-glutting lifting their snouts from the trough long enough to ease their gut  I won't urge the point. Gold-plated poems to stuff up their mind's ass or politics watered down so as not to scare the blue bloods Boo! you well-fed bastards
This one can understand but cannot act, Defeated by detachment and division. That one can act but cannot understand, Defeated by desire and concentration. This one can gain and grasp but not enjoy, Defeated by his haste and heat and hardness; And that one can enjoy but not acquire, Defeated by his softness and self-loving. And so the half-man seeks the one he is not, The friend or lover moving where he cannot, The other terminal, the arc's completion, The periscope with which to see round corners, The one who still may someday, somewhere, somehow Lead him across the frontiers of forbidden Land, to a world reversed, looking-glass country Beyond this bondage and beyond this boredom Of this too known, too own world, this round narrow Room here behind the mouth and nose and eyes.
She wound the scarf tightly around her eyes thinking that if she couldn't see at all she might forget that such a thing as size existed, and pretend he wasn't small but all the scarf blocked out was half the light; his stunted shape persisted through the gauze and she still knew that he was half her height despite their flat shoes and the level floors and all that she had seen in him at first, things like his bounceability on knees, did nothing but contribute to her thirst for what was out of reach, past clouds and trees, when far above the skull that she could feel against her thigh racing around her head were visions of a large, departing heel shaking the nearby woodland with its tread.
In many tongues, hawkers scream our fingers off the fruit display. All day, we never see the rows of lightbulbs shining. Rages faked by blinding grapes and pears make eating cosmopolitan. In  Negro faces do no better than the white against the sea outside. A prude might wait long enough to see the U.S. Fleet pull out. Voyeurs keep dark islands in reserve. Behind their eyes, old men are shooting moons with yellow guns. Solly cleans a carp with carvings doctors and a thug would envy. These market skills go back to deep in Egypt, deep in dynasties of dirt, in minds of cats who hug the market in a storm. Here, it is assumed all things have value. The world will not wear out. Best-selling paperbacks with covers bruised by grease: one dime. No bargaining, though produce can be talked down sharply after five. Who plans to tear this market down? Erect a park? Those militants who hate the old and odd, and dream of homes where lawns are uniformly green. Who gloats at space for rent, stalls abandoned, fire that destroyed those baskets Indians will never weave again and turned a case of rump roasts into char? Let the columns rot, progressive mayors deny a city has a private right to be. Let the market slide into the sea. The sea has meat, is derelict and kind. Snapper, red from failure, live on sun. No bass ever knew another, and the pompano like men arranged to be alone. Market. In November, drink the darkness in and make the dark your closing. Burlesque rows of lightbulbs that were lit all day, shine for the first time, glinting off a pigeon and the rinsed cement and women poking in the garbage for a meal.
The Queen she sent to look for me,  The sergeant he did say, &lsquo;Young man, a soldier will you be  For thirteen pence a day?&rsquo; For thirteen pence a day did I  Take off the things I wore, And I have marched to where I lie,  And I shall march no more. My mouth is dry, my shirt is wet,  My blood runs all away, So now I shall not die in debt  For thirteen pence a day. To-morrow after new young men  The sergeant he must see, For things will all be over then  Between the Queen and me. And I shall have to bate my price,  For in the grave, they say, Is neither knowledge nor device  Nor thirteen pence a day.
The person speaking now isn't the person you think, and what life has offered you as final isn't just as this truth isn't the truth. Under the great hackberry on Putah Creek the ducks were receiving crusts of bread that day, reflected dully in the slow supportive waters. Somewhere there's a saving fact that is only what it is and yet is just and merciful. Do you doubt that? I doubt it. Very few understand Einstein but he, like Charlie Chaplin and Attila, was one of us, not to mention all other winners and their victims. No other race can doubt and thereby change the course of rivers, nations, and end staring at institutional walls, blind windows on nothing. This proves nothing and is thus only what it seems. It defends the right of ducks and water to be what they are, whatever they are, whatever we are. About myself, I'm of two minds. Saint Francis was one of us, but he is dead. If you come to Putah Creek, bring also a crust of bread.
There are people who are paid good money to stand around in smock coats dosing rats with drugs and pushing them over to see which way they fall while taking notes on it. But can it be that  in this  is as flat and bald as <> ask: What is Truth anyway? Is it just Behavior? Nothing is more easily believed by us (said a certain Viennese doctor) than what without reference to the truth comes to meet our wishful illusions. Typology is odious. We wish to feel more complicated than (for example) rodents. Yet what if there are actually only two types of humans left: those who do the pushing, and those whose special fate it is to be numbered among the pushed?
The notebook moves but the hand is still. Green trains in Paris in the subway cuttings flash. No news is good news still. Mauve iris on a dish, swamp iris in a bottle yellow flag. The long disease that haunts this craft comes from the wind, and big white birds (those house cats) make it worse churring about liberty in the rigging. For both of us it is a world of rope. A reporter watches bullets pass and doesnt care. His keen small eye makes the present infinite. Our work starts when the body slumps against the wall, and rough lime scribbles on the dying shoulderblades brushmarks we decipher. I read the coat of a dying man and study the footnotes in your lap where by glory I'm permitted to express the starrier sense this body yields like waves of crucifixes in a baffled sea.
Cross-country, out of sea fog comes a letter in dream: a Bard claims from me &lsquo;on whose land they grow,&rsquo; seeds of the forget-me-not. &lsquo;I ask you to gather them for me,&rsquo; says the Spirit of Poetry. The varied blue in small compass. In multitude a cloud of blue, a river beside the brown river. Not flowers but their seeds, I am to send him. And he bids me remember my nature, speaking of it as of a power. And gather the flowers, and the flowers of &lsquo;labor&rsquo; (pink in the dream, a bright centaury with more petals. Or the form changes to a sea-pink.) <> <> <> <> Out of sea fog, from a hermitage, at break of day. Shall I find them, then  here on my own land, recalled to my nature? O, great Spirit!
Back then when so much was clear and I hadn't learned young men learn from women what it feels like to feel just right, I was twenty-three, she thirty-four, two children, a husband in prison for breaking someone's head. Yelled at, slapped around, all she knew of tenderness was how much she wanted it, and all I knew were back seats and a night or two in a sleeping bag in the furtive dark. We worked in the same office, banter and loneliness leading to the shared secret that to help National Biscuit sell biscuits was wildly comic, which led to my body existing with hers like rain that's found its way underground to water it naturally joins. I can't remember ever saying the exact word, tenderness, though she did. It's a word I see now you must be older to use, you must have experienced the absence of it often enough to know what silk and deep balm it is when at last it comes. I think it was terror at first that drove me to touch her so softly, then selfishness, the clear benefit of doing something that would come back to me twofold, and finally, sometime later, it became reflexive and motiveless in the high ignorance of love. Oh abstractions are just abstract until they have an ache in them. I met a woman never touched gently, and when it ended between us I had new hands and new sorrow, everything it meant to be a man changed, unheroic, floating.
how tinily of squir(two be tween sto nes)ming a gr eenes t you b ecome s whi (mysterious ly)te one t hou
<> And a trail of foam, with the wind abaft! When we turn our keel to the Caribbees, And sweep the ocean of every craft, Each hulk and hull that the Fiend hath sold, With her Spanish hold crammed full of gold,    Heave ho! my bullies! To crowd her sail till she catch our hail, A ten-pound shot through her quarter-rail   Heave ho! my bullies! and a heave! Tattooed and tanned, the Devil's own crew, Dutch and Lascar, and French and Greek, Of every Nation and every hue, A cutlass scar on the brow or cheek, And hair in queues of the murder-thumb,  Made mad with rum for the work to come,    Heave ho! my bullies! To stake with a curse our lives for a purse, And steer for Hell with a roaring verse,   Heave ho! my bullies! and a heave! The sun goes down like a blot of blood As our boats swarm up to her towering hull, And her galleon decks with the battle thud,  Yo ho! for the banner of bones and skull! And the buccaneer crew that will have its fill:  And it's &ldquo;Cut and kill!&rdquo; till the ship is still,    Heave ho! my bullies! Till pistol and dirk have done their pirate work, And the last man yields as the night falls murk,   Heave ho! my bullies! and a heave! The moon comes up like a broad doubloon As the last tar totters along the plank: The women ho! ho! by the light of the moon We dice for them while their eyes stare blank, And they pray to God who heeds them not, While we share each lot o' the loot we got,    Heave ho! my bullies! Then a torch to the hull as away we pull, And a prayer that the Devil be bountiful,   Heave ho! my bullies! and a heave!
One of the dogs chased a boomer right down from the forest's edge to the house dam where it plunged into the ochre waters up to its chest. Before I could grab the mad dog's collar it launched itself straight in after a roo that I'd swear stood higher than me by a head. And that wily creature, its tail anchored in the muddy bed, levered its toenails into position and ripped open my best dog from top to bottom, and then pressed down until the remaining life was thrashed into darkening waters. I was too stung to shoot as that monster roo lurched onto the banks, glutted with battle, eyeing me defiantly, its back turned on this Pyrrhic naval victory.
<> (swag-wreathed, cracked, skull-paved) hovers a basilica: within, Corinthian-fronded; projected from the brain-shell; mind-inhabited; Ionic housed; with outward capitals which spiral diagrammed geometry where rims pierce hubs: Moth to Larva; Worm to Chrysalis; the Seasons' Wheel; wheeled Day to Sundown, Night to Dawn; Ice, Water, Cloud and Rain. Since you crushed chrysalis of netted stars these proofs of ended death prove that their proofs draw no diameters to the unending circle. Painted as marble, the temple is rubble stone drilled by the frost whose wiry eyes travel the convolution of a shell.
&ast;OLD&ast;MAN&ast;BEAVER'S&ast;BLESSING&ast;SONG&ast; &ast;all&ast;i&ast;want&ast;'s&ast;a&ast;good&ast;5&cent;&ast;seegar&ast; &ast;heeheeHOHOheeheeHOHOheeheeHOHO&ast; &ast;all&ast;i&ast;want&ast;'s&ast;a&ast;good&ast;5&cent;&ast;seegar&ast; &ast;heeheeHOHOheeheeHOHOheeheeHOHO&ast; &ast;all&ast;i&ast;want&ast;'s&ast;a&ast;good&ast;5&cent;&ast;seegar&ast; &ast;heeheeHOHOheeheeHOHOheeheeHOHO&ast; &ast;all&ast;i&ast;want&ast;'s&ast;a&ast;good&ast;5&cent;&ast;seegar&ast; &ast;heeheeHOHOheeheeHOHOheeheeHOHO&ast; &ast;all&ast;i&ast;want&ast;'s&ast;a&ast;good&ast;5&cent;&ast;seegar&ast; &ast;heeheeHOHOheeheeHOHOheeheeHOHO&ast; &ast;all&ast;i&ast;want&ast;'s&ast;a&ast;good&ast;5&cent;&ast;seegar&ast; &ast;heeheeHOHOheeheeHOHOheeheeHOHO&ast; &ast;all&ast;i&ast;want&ast;'s&ast;a&ast;good&ast;5&cent;&ast;seegar&ast; &ast;heeheeHOHOheeheeHOHOheeheeHOHO&ast; &ast;all&ast;i&ast;want&ast;'s&ast;a&ast;good&ast;5&cent;&ast;seegar&ast; &ast;heeheeHOHOheeheeHOHOheeheeHOHO&ast; &ast;OLD&ast;MAN&ast;BEAVER'S&ast;BLESSING&ast;SONG&ast;
What kind of a person would kill Black children? What kind of a person could persuade eighteen different Black children to get into a car or a truck or a van? What kind of a person could kill or kidnap these particular Black children: Edward Hope Smith, 14 years old, dead Alfred James Evans, 14 years old, dead Yosef Bell, 9 years old, dead Milton Harvey, 14 years old, dead Angel Lanier, 12 years old, dead Eric Middlebrooks, 14 years old, dead Christopher Richardson, 11 years old, dead Aaron Wyche, 11 years old, dead LaTanya Wilson, 7 years old, dead Anthony B. Carter, 9 years old, dead Earl Lee Terrell, 10 years old, dead Clifford Jones, 13 years old, dead Aaron Jackson, Jr., 9 years old, dead Patrick Rogers, 16 years old, dead Charles Stevens, 12 years old, dead Jeffrey Lamar Mathis, 10 years old, missing Darron Glass, 10 years old, missing Lubie &ldquo;Chuck&rdquo; Geter, 14 years old, dead What kind of a person could kill a Black child and then kill another Black child and then kill another Black child and then kill another Black child and then kill another Black child and then kill another Black child and stay above suspicion? What about the police? What about somebody Black? What sixteen year old would say no to a cop? What seven year old would say no thanks to me? What is an overreaction to murder? What kind of a person could kill a Black child and then kill a Black child and then kill a Black child? What kind of a person are you? What kind of a person am I? What makes you so sure? What kind of a person could save a Black child? What kind of a people will lay down its life for the lives of our children? What kind of a people are we?
A Council-approved replacement for box trees along the verges of suburban roads, it embarrasses with its too sudden blush stunning at first, then a burning reminder of something you'd rather forget. And it unclothes so ungraciously  its semi-clad, mangy, slovenly, first-thing-in-the-morning appearance. And while I've heard it called a bristling firelick, a spiral of Southern Lights, I've also seen honey-eaters bob upside down and unpick its light in seconds.
As if they had warmed a place days ago, cows hunker down, furry boulders poking through frozen snow. A hauled-back canteen hammers through stained isinglass topping the runoff. One waterproof toe holds it under. Apart from the pulling and hauling, this space, this visible breath  a game of statues and attitudes: the torso of the man I will marry, worthy to be naked, knotted and sailing, heaves the ax into standing deadwood. Trail mix balanced in my shivering palm he collects with plush lips onto his tongue. Pocket knife, tortillas, smoky links, cheese  his touch like bumping the lit end of a stranger's cigarette  fire in his mouth, his teeth glinting  In the season of first columbine I bury his body. His fire comes back green. Hard muscles vicious with grace.
Bullets blot out the Life-time smile, Apollo of the picture-page, Blunt-faced young lion Caught by vile Death in an everlasting cage: And, no more young men in the world, The old men troop to honour him. The drums beat glum, Slight snow is swirled In dazzling sun, pale requiem. And pale dark-veiled Persephone, A golden child in either hand, Stands by white pillars; Silently, It seems she might forever stand. In bright grey sun, processionals Of pomp and honour, and of grief, Crown that dead head With coronals. Some stony hearts feel some relief: But not your heart, America, Beating so slow and sure and strong, Stricken in his Triumphal car, Guard Caesar's bitter laurels long With solders' music, rites of war: He had proved bravely when put on: The soldiers shoot. Rage echoes far Above the grave at Arlington.
I am a star wandering the earth and shining up from its depths with only this shell in my hand: this fragile orbit this creature's castle this seed from the sky formed in the womb of water. Sieving the mica sands of truth a long time I have been pilgrim carrying this shell in my hand: this craft of Venus coquille of St. Jacques this star of the deep fluted with the rays of the sun. Long have I been a pilgrim star and this, all I have, holds all I know: this shell in my hand from the sea.
Cage's quartet no. 1 really it's a thoughtful, engaging, and quite beautiful work and not a bundle of clich&eacute;s, as once was thought. So turn out the light. Listen. The storm outdoors accompanies everything tonight, wind drones in the television antenna on the roof, sleet crashes against the windows. The refrigerator kookilates as usual, and the furnace does its booming and strutting below. Inside the man's head, along with incessant yearning for one more beautiful poem and one more good look at a woman's nakedness, is the perpetual noise caused by deteriorating aural nerves, high-pitched, a baby cicada wailing in its shell, &ldquo;Let me out, you fuckers! Let me out.&rdquo; And would anyone deny such a reasonable desire? Well, really all of us would, and confinement is part of the deal, wailing is part of the deal. The cicada splits and sings and dies, as every artist must go on always to dying, to what is new, repudiating what has been done already, those remarkable and reasonable accomplishments, repudiating us, but still one wishes that Cage had left Orientalism, which at best is a kind of rot in the American mind, to the academic musicians and had continued to give us the confined, mellow music of suffering. Listen. The wind makes its triads, the trilling nerve its E above high C, and the cello drones in the night.
Two men sit beside the fire's rubble under a night sky its tiny, intense lights like the notes they wring from battered guitars, the push of melody and chords so intimate the players want almost to look away as, through squinty half-smiles, they note each other's canny touch or sly rejoinder: blues! each further riff, each variation pleasing because related, yet separate to the ear  made from self but freed from self-regard since made for the other out of the other's play; like the best of conversations, like the fire settling into its strongest heat, as if they sat at opposite sides of the sign for infinity, talents quivering at the crossing place. But what lasts? Soon they yawn, stretch, take a last pull on the Scotch, then stroll  flashlights catching mica in the path  towards the cabins where their wives lie, already sleeping, bare armed under the sheets.
And so, making clear in advance I know there are miles and I reckon myself with the tramps, which is a place of honour in this world: under the wheels of luxury, at table with cripples and hunchbacks ... From the top of the bell-tower roof, I proclaim it: I  For their rotten, unsteady root for the damage done in their cradle for the absent-minded way their hands go in and out of their pockets; for the way their softest word is obeyed like a shouted order; because they will not be let into heaven: and because they don't look in your eyes; and because they send secrets and their passions In the nights that are thrust upon them they kiss and drink under compulsion, and because in all their accountings in boredom, in gilding, in wadding, they can't buy me I confirm it, I  and in spite of their shaven fatness, their fine drink some sudden and a look that is like a dog's doubting ... the core of their balance nought, but are the weights true? I say that among all outcasts there are no such orphans on earth. There is also a nasty fable about camels getting through needles  for that look, surprised to death apologizing for sickness, as if they were suddenly bankrupt: &lsquo;I would have been glad to lend, but&rsquo; &lsquo;I counted in carats once and then I was one of them.&rsquo; For all these things, I swear it: I
Brothers, my teeth hurt And I've no money to have them pulled. If you know a way, tell me. The collection man knocks on my window. My wife sleeps with her thighs bare. In my time I attempted a few prayers. If you know a way, tell me. No special identifying marks. My coat is torn. The wind's cold even for a dog. My coat is still torn. What next? I make journeys (mostly in my thoughts), I go back to 1942. There's no money there either. Here, I'll pour one shot for me, One for this snowy night. If I get through my 33rd year, I'll live forever.
Your hooves have stamped at the black margin of the wood, Even where horrible green parrots call and swing. My works are all stamped down into the sultry mud. I knew that horse-play, knew it for a murderous thing. What wholesome sun has ripened is wholesome food to eat, And that alone; yet I, being driven half insane Because of some green wing, gathered old mummy wheat In the mad abstract dark and ground it grain by grain And after baked it slowly in an oven; but now I bring full-flavoured wine out of a barrel found Where seven Ephesian topers slept and never knew When Alexander's empire passed, they slept so sound. Stretch out your limbs and sleep a long Saturnian sleep; I have loved you better than my soul for all my words, And there is none so fit to keep a watch and keep Unwearied eyes upon those horrible green birds.
See that day, Lord, did you hear what happened then. A nine o'clock shadow always chases the sun. And in the thick heavy air came the Ku Klux Klan To the tent where the Queen was about to sing her song. They were going to pull the Blues Tent down. Going to move the Queen out of the town. Take her twelve bar beat and squash it into the ground. She tried to get her Prop Boys together, and they got scared. She tried to get the Prop Boys together, and they got scared. She said Boys, Boys, get those men out of here. But they ran away and left the Empress on her own. She went up to the men who had masks over their head With her hand on her hips she cursed and she hollered, &lsquo;I'll get the whole damn lot of you out of here now If I have to. You are as good as dead. You just pick up the sheets and run. Go on.&rsquo; That's what she done. Her voice was cast-iron. You should have seen them. You should have seen them. Those masks made of sheets from somebody's bed. Those masks flying over their heads. Flapping. They was flapping like some strange bird migrating. Some bird that smelt danger in the air, a blue song. And flew. Fast. Out of the small mid western town. To the sound of black hands clapping. And the Empress saying, &lsquo;And as for you&rsquo; to the ones who did nothing.
Deep-rooted vine, delay your fruit Beyond youth's rashness. I have seen Rich promise wither to the root Before its time had been. Drain all the darkness of the soil And stand there shrivelled, crisp and dry, Too lifeless in your parchment coil To open one green eye. Some watch the March winds animate Those early bulbs in Winter's bed. Envy them not, but keep your state. Let others think you dead. Contain in secrecy that balm Strengthening the sap before it move, That the broad leaves from wells of calm One day grow dark with love. I know a tree as dry as yours. The patient leaf is put forth late. Its life is anchored in the hours For which the heart must wait.
(For A berdeen in Spring) Glitter of mica at the windy corners, Tar in the nostrils, under blue lamps budding Like bubbles of glass the blue buds of a tree, Night-shining shopfronts, or the sleek sun flooding The broad abundant dying sprawl of the Dee: For these and for their like my thoughts are mourners That yet shall stand, though I come home no more, Gas-works, white ballroom, and the red brick baths And salmon nets along a mile of shore, Or beyond the municipal golf-course, the moorland paths And the country lying quiet and full of farms. This is the shape of a land that outlasts a strategy And is not to be taken with rhetoric or arms. Or my own room, with a dozen books on the bed (Too late, still musing what I mused, I lie And read too lovingly what I have read), Brantome, Spinoza, Yeats, the bawdy and wise, Continuing their interminable debate, With no conclusion, they conclude too late, When their wisdom has fallen like a grey pall on my eyes. Syne we maun part, their sall be nane remeid  Unless my country is my pride, indeed, Or I can make my town that homely fame That Byron has, from boys in Carden Place, Struggling home with books to midday dinner, For whom he is not the romantic sinner, The careless writer, the tormented face, The hectoring bully or the noble fool, But, just like Gordon or like Keith, a name: A tall, proud statue at the Grammar School.
For there is a place where the water hovers, A cove, and on it at dusk looking down from a height See how those congregational gulls, That have come together from all the shoreline, Bred in who knows what isolate rookeries Seaward in that ribbon of coast and in those rock-bound skerries, Those gulls, now come together, Search out over the placid water A hovering line, straggling, What do they do? What is it they are seeking, Down there, so wavering, dipping, Dipping and wafting? Feeding, most likely. But that smoke-like line, That / &short; [ Gone. The dark takes it. And that private beholdance, Gone with it. Something mystic and untoward There in the gull-line Over the green-dark water, Over the slow passing of the swell That plashes gently, Far down there, On the pebble freckled shore. Something was completed. Something revealed, and a resolution. Something is made at rest in the self To have looked in on it. Where have the gulls gone? Unseen. The dark over them. That coarse persistent repetitious cry Comes up from below. All quit. The stars have it. But the mystery prevails Like a soft enchantment, As does the quality of wonder When what invokes but never answers Lingers its why beyond the eye's retention. There is a scope of quietude that may be stirred. There is a newness waiting in the self For the gulls to go again Across the smoke-dis / &short; water, Across the gulls' descant.
if you and i awakening discover that(somehow in the dark)this world has been Picked,like a piece of clover,from the green meadow of time lessness;quietly turning toward me the guessable mirrors which your eyes are You will communicate a little more than twice all that so gently while we were asleep while we were each other disappeared:but i slightly smiling, gradually shall reenter the singular kingdom (sleep) .while some thing else kisses busily a memory,which how exquisitely flutters in the cornerless tomorrow
The prisoners of infinite choice Have built their house In a field below the wood And are at peace. It is autumn, and dead leaves On their way to the river Scratch like birds at the windows Or tick on the road. Somewhere there is an afterlife Of dead leaves, A stadium filled with an infinite Rustling and sighing. Somewhere in the heaven Of lost futures The lives we might have led Have found their own fulfilment.
To escape him and my traitorous body made me happy. The nights he crept into my room sucking himself to sleep, great wings I could not beat down rose in me. He was only there for himself, slept afterwards, while I smoothed the feathers of my heart afraid to grow frail and hysterical. I wanted the company of cold people who would never touch me. Death, the little I saw of it, was satisfying. Even if accidentally they touched each other, their fingers slid right through leaving no print. And their eyes were frozen balls I could look into and not see myself. Back here in my husband's house I can't stop thinking about it  the huge paw of Hercules strangling my saviour, how I tried running farther on so I could never come back. Blue veins beat on the hand that ripped me back to life. There was nothing cold about the fingers that wrenched my shoulders and left their marks, singe marks of the fire licking my body I try and try to quench, but cannot.
When smoke's white blooms have seeded from the bones, When creeds of flame have crossed the sacrificial breast, The twitching ashes wait For those light syllables less than undertones Murderous, immediate, Caressing nearer than love's hand caressed, At whose command Death runs, at whose behest Sleep claps two stones. Here sacred walls surround their withered guest. Vain are tall vases and the velvet offerings; Virtues are vain For this whose vigil cowers, whose voice at rest Speaks to the Slain With Pentecostal tongues, the lightning's wings. Perched where this lies a bird of water sings Watching the West. Strewn dust, left still for love's warm scatterings, Black in the fiery centre of grief's aureoled thought, Our palm must scatter these Forgiven particles, like seeds in wings, To the five seas. Day's burial and the nails of Night have brought This silence, and an image burnt to nought Through light's gold rings. Paint on this breath a flying chariot. Carve the known relic near the unapproachable coast. Stoop, and engrave One afraid ship above the whirlpool's knot, And let the wave Leap to that life, until the deluge host Heaven-high and falling, gather sail and ghost Where winds are not. What may love's language near the dead tongue trust? Fire steals the cherished parchment crumbling to astound The staring dark Stunned by true dust as by a trumpet blast Whose point, whose spark, Guiding God's circle where all stars are found, Sinks to this changeling's pall, this mummer's mound, With all the Past. Tree of all leaves, skin of all creatures, ground Where eyes still seek an image in the Godhead made, Our hands have tied What death must now undo without a sound; But you, the bride Of morning, shining through the yew-tree's shade, Hold with unique unrest, so naked laid, Our eyes spellbound.
<> Moslem must segregate his odalisque,  2 no more than one need see the symboled phallus1 while meditating at an obelisk.   2 If we could be together day after day,  3 companionship, pointed with entering wedge4 compact, whittled by common task and play3 inevitable and slow, would split the pledge4 which kisses tallied once in valediction:  5 that our hidden selves in separation meet. 6 The corollary's simple contradiction 5 May render yet the contract obsolete.  6 Habit is evil, all habit, even speech;  7 and promises prefigure their own breach.  7
<> Peeping about on this side and on that, And feeling in the trees. He was as tall As the big apple tree, and twice as fat: His beard poked out, all bristly-black, and there Were leaves and gorse and heather in his hair. He held a blackthorn club in his right hand, And plunged the other into every tree, Searching for something You could stand Beside him and not reach up to his knee, So big he was I trembled lest he should Come trampling, round-eyed, down to where I stood. I tried to get away. But, as I slid Under a bush, he saw me, and he bent Down deep at me, and said, &ldquo; I pointed over there, and off he went  But, while he searched, I turned and simply flew Round by the lilac bushes back to you.
My memories are common, memories of baseballs asleep all night in the blackened pocket of a Spalding glove, of red enamel peppers heaped on a green table, of the wind nagging the line of sycamores along my father's drive  but tonight, alone in this sea town, I think only of the time my best friend and I rode all the way across Apalachee Bay, lowered and laid into the green bow wave of his brother's boat, our free hands just touching through the spilled phosphorous pushed up in careful passage over the evening waters. I suppose the lights of the beach houses appeared among the pines like white birds settling in for the night. I suppose we believed we rode the best moment of our lives;  I remember the few words we spoke as our forked sleek and brown bodies dragged above the seabed where the green grasses called  bent flowing, conjured toward sleep by the gentle and relentless hand of the tide. We said  with the reverence of penitents, swearing, as if our future lay relaxed and permanent in the seas of the moon, that we would love them forever, which we have. We saw the stars take their places, orchestral and perfected, and I suppose as we looked southward past the island where our families, drugged by the sea days, sprawled on the porch fashioning charitable stories from the gaudy breeze riding in under the wing of Florida night I suppose we did not mind or harken the stiff seas bristling beyond, as if, in the commonness of time, there was a moment we understood without acknowledging when the dangerous world was simply a white line of wave crest that the night would erase.
In the clean house on the rock where sleepy headlands drink the evening sea and floors are cut to fit horizons, the great fish-eye revolves in a socket that floats on mercury. Waters slide and close over the drowned, their bones add salt to salt, grains among the sand, cries in the gull's throat. <> the century's night. In early times it took a man's sleeve bursting to flame one placid afternoon, as he dipped his arm between the stilled facets, to learn that, if revolution ceased at sunrise, daylight could turn its eye in on itself and burn the heart like a collapsing star, as a child learns fire by capturing the sun in a magnifying glass to make Excalibur.
Fruit machines and pin tables  Someone has got to pay for the round. Only release the spring, the ball Will scurry, the coins will clatter and all That was ill lost may well be found. Contract and lease and marriage lines  Someone has got to pay for the round. Only sign on the line and all The gains you doubt may come on call And rate one farthing in the pound. Stake and faggot and gas chamber  Someone has got to pay for the round. Only press the button and all The springs will twang, the heads will fall, And yet, whatever drinks are downed, Someone has got to pay for the round.
Tree powers, finger tips, First pentad of the four, Discover all your poet asks Drumming on his brow. Birch-peg, throbbing thumb, By power of divination, Birch, bring him news of love; Loud knocks the heart. Rowan-rod, forefinger, By power of divination, Unriddle him a riddle; The key's cast away. Ash, middle finger, By power of divination Weather-wise, fool otherwise, Mete him out the winds. Alder, physic finger, By power of divination Diagnose all maladies Of a doubtful mind. Willow-wand, earfinger, By power of divination Force confessions from the mouth Of a mouldering corpse. Finger-ends, five twigs, Trees, true-divining trees, Discover all your poet asks Drumming on his brow.
I met a colleague On his way home With a mushroom to stew, Giant, like a skull Or, white, a regular Moby Dick's lolling tongue And soft to the touch, Not at all like Porcelain of skull, More like breast, More like something new, As if the odd textures of love Had just come around the corner Into a mapled view. &ldquo;It'll cook just fine,&rdquo; he said, And carried it off, the skull, the tongue, the breast. He carried off Moby Dick's white tongue.
Now this new-minted moon, this circled silver, Moves across the Mary-mantled blue, Where distant isolated star-drops quiver, Keen and delicate as April dew. Now snow-touched wind, the child of night, breathes through The chill and dimming hour, and night I see To follow soft and slow, and thicker strew The slopes of heaven with stars. Now day must flee To fastness beyond the ramparts of the sea. The moon soon spreads a path of golden flints Across the bay, that glitters brokenly; And now this gravel-gold thick gleams and glints, And flings off fiery flakes of light, which fly And shoot in flashing splendour, shaken by An enchanted dragon from his gravelling side; Who, enraptured, crouches in the high And heedless beauty of the moon, and whose wide And lashing tail-flukes on the beach disturb the tide. The wind that sucks new strength from night, sweeps round And gleans up whisps of darkened cloud until The skiey pageant shows undimmed from ground Behind the sea's hard chilly edge. This hill Whereon I climb close-shelters me, but will Not save the bay, whose skin is shuddered all With cold. Now suddenly is shed from still Dark boughs of night a fruit-ripe star whose fall The eye must rush with, and see chafed out past recall. The headlands that enclose the bay are long And black, and rest upon the waters, light As padded paws far spread. The undersong Of wind among the stiffening grass, and bright Thin silvered branches of this birch, makes night A music with the curlew's sudden cry Of terror and of dread to match aright Her loveliness, which I may not deny However her indifference I may decry.
No one in New York knows How it must be my Italy, Those hidden grapefields Between two fingerlakes, Seneca and Cayuga, As one place has always been Another for me, as my destiny Has always been merely the lure Of another, those fishflies. Nor do they know how I wish I had been a boy in Buffalo To see there in the transcendent Railroad station a large hand Grasping mine, the great buffalo Looming over us, the bronze, the mythic Toy grown copper-huge In the waiting room Where soldiers went to war And said goodbyes In railroad stations Before the great buffalo, When statues were made In proper parts of the country Like animal crackers, To please little boys. Actually I munched A watersogged buffalo In an old cornfield, That is, rain had driven The floss to rags And the leaves were tobacco-brown, Hardly a boyhood gold; And my father shuffled Away, never a wave, nor his bold hand At a handle, leaping a train, Bolting at destiny. And even the state had a sorry name.
By the rules you stop in that pose fixed when the signal came. You scan their faces. Your hand flung loose almost touches Anitas' hand. If it's ever over and they don't move, the sun floats away or the moon sets in the tired branches of the elm. Down the street porchlights bloom. Rivers flow, now and then a building crumbles, a season passes, old friends collapse and sink into nothing. Maybe some games never end. There was always going to be a better bundle of rules, a scaffolding  a truth beyond the houses. Breathing the hard air you stand faithful.
I have walked through many lives, some of them my own, and I am not who I was, though some principle of being abides, from which I struggle not to stray. When I look behind, as I am compelled to look before I can gather strength to proceed on my journey, I see the milestones dwindling toward the horizon and the slow fires trailing from the abandoned camp-sites, over which scavenger angels wheel on heavy wings. Oh, I have made myself a tribe out of my true affections, and my tribe is scattered! How shall the heart be reconciled to its feast of losses? In a rising wind the manic dust of my friends, those who fell along the way, bitterly stings my face. Yet I turn, I turn, exulting somewhat, with my will intact to go wherever I need to go, and every stone on the road precious to me. In my darkest night, when the moon was covered and I roamed through wreckage, a nimbus-clouded voice directed me: &ldquo;Live in the layers, not on the litter.&rdquo; Though I lack the art to decipher it, no doubt the next chapter in my book of transformations is already written. I am not done with my changes.
We harked up the path in the dark to the bamboo house green strokes down my back arms over your doubled hips under cow-breath thatch bentcool breasts brush my chest  and Naga walked in with a candle, &ldquo;I'm sleepy&rdquo; Or jungle ridge by a snag  banyan canyon a Temminck's Robin whirled down the waterfall gorge in zazen, a poncho spread out on the stones. below us the overturning silvery brush-bamboo slopes  rainsqualls came up on us naked brown nipples in needles of ocean- cloud rain. Or the night in the farmhouse with Franco on one side, or Pon Miko's head against me, I swung you around and came into you careless and joyous, late when Antares had set Or out on the boulders south beach at noon rockt by surf burnd under by stone burnd over by sun saltwater caked skinswing hips on my eyes burnbetween; That we caught: sprout took grip in your womb and it held. new power in your breath called its place. blood of the moonstoppt; you pickt your steps well. Waves and the prevalent easterly breeze. whispering into you, through us, the grace.
Could not locate the hour, nor return  as if leaving a night bar newborn I spun on updrafts like some bittern who has forgotten his marsh and scrub hut. But my dead friend I could not forget though only his back showed, for he taught or rather shamed me to read story in brute new wrong and not look away, falconer's eye down through the bird's eye. Shame not splendor the sure teacher! Hard following, to find his face gathered to a blur, and that I caught no word. How long he had stood by that water only water knew, on a bay where port cities, armlets of strung amber, ventured linkings along their own light. For greeting he pointed to the wet pilings, swung his feet over, and sat with legs blurring in the black riffle, his calm inviting me towards that cool abundance, wings whirring its wide lull. I still tried to form his face, failing, while his shin swung like patience, bleeding white in water, timing the shore's long whisper. Always he takes me this far, until sunk spurs yield in the offshore terrors he slew without shield-mirror, hair snaking with a pulse that offers no handhold for its fluency, clear as eely weed under flood waters. It seemed then that he would turn to say how he found honey, how I might see bees hive black sun in each far city, wine of the small worker, rare basswood's  but you did not say how that hunt goes, you looked away, my troubler, as glass bends in water along a new course, or light burying in stone shatters to overplus, before sight prepares.
The &ldquo;mystery of things&rdquo; where is it found? Where is it, that it does not appear At least long enough for us to see It is a mystery? What does the river, what does the tree Know about it? And, I who know no more about it than they, What do I know about it? Whenever I look at things and think What men think about them, I laugh like the stream Falling with a cool sound Over the stones. For the only hidden meaning things have Is that they have no hidden meaning. Stranger than all that is strange, Than poets' dreams and philosophical ideas Is this: things are actually Just what they appear to be And there is nothing about them to understand. Yes, here is what my senses learned All by themselves: Things do not have meanings: they have existence. Things are the only hidden meanings of things.
I like to play with him He would be lovely to play with He is so solemn sensitive conceited He would be lovely to play with I could pretend Say so-and-so and so-and-so Watch his responses How'd he take that today And this tomorrow, Mood, tense, you see I'd conjugate His Inexcellency. Oh on that evening you were So charming enchanting touching Lost wounded and betrayed Oh that should have been only the beginning.
Broken bleats from a half-built house by the reefy unfeeling river prefigure goat. Where? Whose goat? Who'd wall a goat up in cinderblocks? A kind of goat closet full of hairy, shadowy, strawy, obstinate hopelessness of goat. Only a kid, really, but mammy and all other times undone, unhappened for her in the huge push to get out. So I grieve for her and her sore forked head rattling wire mesh like machinery, for the pale hurt muzzle pleading between pearl hooves. It's beech I poke into the helpless loop of her mouth. She meets my labrador nostril to nostril, but they breathe different languages. I look my own language deep into the well beneath the letter-box-black slit in the gold mandala of her eye. It finds a goat's ghost there, lonely as snow. She's not my goat, she's not my goat. Somebody's collar of hospitality is called `I love that goat.' Somebody's notion of living in the country is building their own house slowly, slowly around their own goat.
Far down below in next door's yard a heap of part-dismembered cookers. On the sixth floor shelves of plants like trailing wires and old toup&eacute;es. They've entered the big sleep, said long goodbyes. But that's not all, there's more, the winter merely stores desires under the bed, in envelopes or tins. It is a time of scuttling, wrapping close, watching the waves of pigeons beat against cold air. Even now something begins, if ever so quietly, something so various it is impossible to repeat, that happens only once each time, perhaps once any lifetime, a sea-change so immense we cannot see it happen but no one can stop thinking about it. The maps are restless, all the boundaries are tense; they have this feeling in the gut. On the playground pingpong table someone scrawls the words  The fearful and the ugly stalk the spring as always. The fog's white terror calls at dawn, remains with us. Its tyranny lends dark edges to our talk, but that won't stop us talking, listening. The university bells begin to toll, the central heating gurgles and ticks, the starling chatters on and telephones ring in nearby rooms. The world is audible at last above its politics and talks to itself. Behind the frosted glass someone takes a shower. These things are done precisely as before but feel a little different now. The yellow grass is its own particular shade. The railings run more purposefully and reveal precise configurations in the gaps. It matters that you give things the right name and measure their extent, their power. It happens rarely. Now's the time perhaps for understanding what remains the same. The water thunders in the shower.
Fish in a bowl, cat on the rug, a vase of wild iris brought inside. When I start to change the water for the fish and scrub the tank when I dip my net and the fish, as usual, sprint from wall to wall like something crazed today when I lift one out of the water I see my child, hands tied at her side, writhing and tossing in her transparent cage. The nurse was coming toward her with a hose to cut off the air and suck the mucus out. And since what had to be cleaned was in her throat and she could not speak, her mouth closed and opened without a sound on the  <> <> think that then, watching: I think it now, this fish in my net and me thrown back ten years.
I am the world-crier, and this is my dangerous career Since she has put the dirt between us Since she has hurried on before me Since she has left the little hut of men Seven black cities are buried where the Virgin sleeps The waves of the water hurl her clean-throated lover home &ldquo;Darling&rdquo; and I address the rot of her pure body, her purity That neither beast nor man can despoil, that no one knows Since her heart is silent Since her eyes are closed Since her arms are empty of me &ldquo;Darling&rdquo; and I speak against the slain as well as the slayers, Against you and against myself, against the creak of our bellies, Against the smug Tower, against all our treachery and human sloth Since the room is cold and the light is growing feeble Since she has gone to join the things of God Since she is dead, since she is dead now Since men are dying for things that have no meaning Since nobody seems to care anymore I know what you do when the crowds have gone I followed you when you went to sell us out I understand what they want and how they will get it &ldquo;Darling&rdquo; and I have lain on her white breast as she lies now, As alone as she is, as lost walking earth as she is beneath it <> <> <> &ldquo;Darling&rdquo; and I have knelt by her side as Joseph Mary's, praying Against the black world and the rain falling on our two faces, And the rain falling on the two faces that look up through the grass Since the guns are aimed at us Since the trenches have been dug Since it remains only to die Since she lies quiet in her grave Since she has gone to live with her God I am the one to call your bluff, and this is my climate Rage and harry, O wind; roll thunder, be a maddened storm; Buckle, gouge and shatter; roar, howl, foam, splinter; Level the cities, send their hideous buildings down; Plow them to their knees; fling up the blinding sand; Let your lightning go; lean against their flimsy bridges; Scream, curse, sing! O wind of a peoples' wrath! Soar in a million tongues. Flay all hate from the earth. Rise up, rise up in strict beauty, be lullaby for all these slain.
In a childhood of hats  my uncles in homburgs and derbies, Fred Astaire in high black silk, the yarmulke my grandfather wore like the palm of a hand cradling the back of his head  only my father went hatless, even in winter. And in the spring, when a turban of leaves appeared on every tree, the Hat Lady came with a fan of pins in her mouth and pins in her sleeves, the Hat Lady came  that Saint Sebastian of pins, to measure my mother's head. I remember a hat of dove grey felt that settled like a bird on the nest of my mother's hair. I remember a pillbox that tilted over one eye pure Myrna Loy, and a navy straw with cherries caught at the brim that seemed real enough for a child to have to pick. Last year when the chemicals took my mother's hair, she wrapped a towel around her head. And the Hat Lady came, a bracelet of needles on each arm, and led her to a place where my father and grandfather waited, head to bare head, and Death winked at her and tipped his cap.
What is nightfall In that dismal land? Or the quaint lull of Sunday finding its end? His favorite reading Was that of spring light, And of hard fighting, And of painted feet. Could they have known They would have prayed At some gilded throne While he sullenly toyed, Bewitched his tending aunt, Patted dry wept blood, Prepared anew for the hunt. At best he's softly praised.
So from A to B we point and counterpoint, tread a thin line, split hairs so finely that we lose the thread. With every manoeuvre you wonder how I passed the test. At every junction I could fill in your face. And with the temperature gauge getting into the red, and at the invitation of the Last Chance Service Station, we pull up, let steam off and give it a rest. I'm so hungry I could eat a buttered monkey. You, you could manage a racehorse and go back for the jockey.
At the piano, the girl, as if rowing upstream, is driving triplets against the duple meter, one hand for repetition, one hand for variation and for song. She knows nothing, but Bach knows everything. Outside, in the vast disordered world, the calves have been taken from their mothers; both groups bawled and hooted all night long  she heard them from her quilted double bed. Twice a day, she gives the young their frothy warm placebo. While her brother steadies the cow with grain, her sister leans in close from the little stool, fingertips aligned on the wrinkled tits as if to pick some soft, fleshy fruit but pressing in, hard, while pulling down, she milks with both hands, two jets of milk spraying the metal pail as they go in. The girl must put her whole hand in the pail and push the head of the suckling toward it: wet muzzle, corrugated tongue: when her last year's calf was in the bank she drew the money out for candlesticks, a present for her parents tall and brass because she thought the eighteenth was for brass. Hers was the only gift. Her mother filled them with thin candles, never lit they are twin lighthouses on the mantel, twinned again by the watery mirror and flanking the loud squat clock, her metronome. At the piano, hands in her lap  what's given, and what's made from luck and will  she also hears a diaphonic moan: long before dusk the animals in the pens again have started calling for each other, either hungry or too full, she can't tell which is which. Her mother's in the kitchen, her father's in the hayloft pitching hay, she pushes off in her wooden boat  she knows nothing, she thinks no one could be happier than this.
At history's compulsion A welcome greeted once All gross or trivial objects That reached, by grand endurance, Their bicentenary year. But not two thousand years Could sanctify this building With bat-and-ivy ruin, Or justify these furnishings As woe-begone antiques. No doubt it is good news That the spell of age is lifted, The museums' greed rebuked: Yet might this not have come about Less nastily perhaps?
The old man on the prison work release gang hoeing asphalt followed us to Wilkeson and those cyrillic graves, to Carbanado and that one long empty street, Voight's Creek and then Kapowsin and our picnic in a field of mint. Wherever we went, old haunts I wanted you to see, he hung there grim. I ruined him with theory: sodomy, infanticide. His bitter face kept saying we die broken. Our crab pat&egrave; seemed bitter and the sun. In old poems I put evil things in Carbanado where I'd never been because a word that soft and lovely must be wrong, must hide what really happened, the unreported murder in the tavern, faithless wives. Clouds were birds of prey. The cell door clangs before we know we're doing wrong. The stern click of the calendar damned us long ago to take pain on the tongue. One day, alone in an asylum, I will find a door left open and the open field beyond, a wife beside that road the map forgot waiting as prearranged. She'll say, I'm crazy too. I understand. From then on we will seek the harboring towns, towns you never find, those flowers dying certain the forlorn die wise. My sister, we have been released for the entire day.
We had codes In our house. Like Locks; they said We never lock Our door to you. And never did. Their bed Stood, spotless as a tub ... I passed it every day For twenty years, until I went my way. My chore Was marking time. Gluing Relics into books I saw Myself at seven learning Distance at my mother's knee. My favorite snapshot of my Father shows him pushing forty And lyrical Above his firstborn's empty face. The usual miracle.
We thought we could trick nature but she slipped in through the back porch sometime after Valentine's Day like the small animal who began appearing then; we attracted her with the heat of our blue fire. It was the candle in the window. Seeking shelter, the stray cat rubbed her orange fur against our door. We never let her in, having nothing to spare, but I imagined the slight pressure of her body, persistent as guilt, on the other side of the door. At night, we tried to muffle her human noises with thick cushions but the sound, cradled in the iced trees, moaned through. As the trees thawed, silence returned in the shape of flowers. One evening in early spring we were drawn to the porch because the moon was framed in branches like a giant magnolia. You brought out the telescope and we took turns squinting at the moon. It seemed to burn off the color in our eyes. That same night, the curry-colored cat, pausing in a petal of moonlight, was struck by a blind vehicle. Later, sometime after midnight, when we were throwing out the trash, we saw someone stoop to wrap the stunned pieces in an old sheet. This morning, I feel the pressure of that mute fur in the weight of blossoms now invading the trees. Beneath the blue flowered flannel, an invisible tension continues to change the shape of my body. You, too, are undergoing a transformation as your large, untrained hands will one day soon surprise you. They will come to trust themselves enough to guide our frightened child through water, out from the darkness of a dream.
When nine planets queue up in Scorpio the Earthlings revolt. It's Breeze by a landslide, Huzza! the first woman mayor of New York. Breeze makes Cynthia Ozick chief-of-staff and gets on the horn  Pampers within city limits. Death to white sugar. The landlords and baby rapers twist like sausage over Brooklyn Bridge. After seven weeks, Breeze takes a nose cone in the neck from a paid assassin and is reborn as a night watchman at a gallery uptown, and as she rides the A Train from the Bowery she chants prayers in Tibetan. Everyone assumes Breeze is crazy, so who wouldn't  this chanting could be coming from the bowels of the earth, louder than boomboxes, swaying and grooving in Tibetan from downtown through midtown through Harlem, and so Breeze (now a baritone named George) is never threatened. George works graveyard shift, has one green eye and one yellow eye and owns three TVs. Sometimes the chants brush a sore spot, and without warning, George finds himself flooded with tears. He's late for work when he tarries in the park to compose his face. His boss, a brisk young woman with two master's degrees and a mean grin, docks him for tardiness. How can George explain? LaBoss keeps a spare pair of pantyhose in her old oak desk. She'll buck for Mayor's Council on the Arts. She'll wage a raging campaign for mayor while George watches on his TVs. He's rooting for her. He'd like a new boss, but he's forgiven her anything else is just too much trouble. And she will win.
Migrating along (butterfly-like, actually) I came on a sweeping system, round and big, and traveling with it forgot it was not I (a magnificent loss for that much gain) but the system played out in time, dissipating into severally estranged motions and, an edged-out peripheral bit myself, I dropped dashed to a breaking shoal and fluttered bedazzled with separation but also with what a relief.
With wood from a hundred-year-old tree They make sacrificial vessels, Covered with green and yellow designs. The wood that was cut away Lies unused in the ditch. If we compare the sacrificial vessels with the wood in the ditch We find them to differ in appearance: One is more beautiful than the other Yet they are equal in this: both have lost their original nature. So if you compare the robber and the respectable citizen You find that one is, indeed, more respectable than the other: Yet they agree in this: they have both lost The original simplicity of man. How did they lose it? Here are the five ways: Love of colors bewilders the eye And it fails to see right. Love of harmonies bewitches the ear And it loses its true hearing. Love of perfumes Fills the head with dizziness. Love of flavors Ruins the taste. Desires unsettle the heart Until the original nature runs amok. These five are enemies of true life. Yet these are what &ldquo;men of discernment&rdquo; claim to live for. They are not what I live for: If this is life, then pigeons in a cage Have found happiness!
When our brother Fire was having his dog's day Jumping the London streets with millions of tin cans Clanking at his tail, we heard some shadow say &lsquo;Give the dog a bone&rsquo; and so we gave him ours; Night after night we watched him slaver and crunch away The beams of human life, the tops of topless towers. Which gluttony of his for us was Lenten fare Who mother-naked, suckled with sparks, were chill Though cotted in a grille of sizzling air Striped like a convict black, yellow and red; Thus were we weaned to knowledge of the Will That wills the natural world but wills us dead. O delicate walker, babbler, dialectician Fire, O enemy and image of ourselves, Did we not on those mornings after the All Clear, When you were looting shops in elemental joy And singing as you swarmed up city block and spire, Echo your thoughts in ours? &lsquo;Destroy! Destroy!&rsquo;
In the corded hollows of the wood leaves fall. How light it is. The trees are rinsing themselves of leaves like Degas laundresses, their forearms cold with the jelly-smooth blue of starch-water. The laundresses lean back and yawn with their arms still in the water like beech-boughs, pliant on leavings of air. In the corded hollows of the wood how light it is. How my excitement burns in the chamber.
He can climb vulgar Like scooting up the Side of a diamond Discourse with a phoenix Sail out to sea in a Golden-brown doughnut He can run a rodeo With ants This man Can make the M in Mc Donald's a rainbow Transpose a sonata from Fiddle to trumpet Run out to the back yard Pick a plum, eat that Plum, run back Sit down, cross his Legs, smile Then hear that sonata Before it's tooted Good What the heck I'm sick of Roller Derby champeens A hummingbird standing still in mid air, Robert Hayden is The Great Aware
When I go spinning, your care is given to the steel nerves of reticent angels. When I cannot hold, my own heart drops away, some sure finger from a faded portrait follows you in the thorn-filled curves of man's road. When I cannot dream, I pray in blind rooms that possible colors and bodies will converge around you, set you sailing over rocks, away from the soulless. When I am not whole, I entrust you to seraphim in their difficult dominion.
<> A lean swimmer dives into night sky, Into half-moon mist. Two trees are coal black. This is a great white ghost between. It is cool to look at. Strong men, strong women, come here. Eight years is a long time To be fighting all the time. The republic is a dream. Nothing happens unless first a dream. The wind bit hard at Valley Forge one Christmas. Soldiers tied rags on their feet. Red footprints wrote on the snow ... ... and stone shoots into stars here ... into half-moon mist to-night. Tongues wrangled dark at a man. He buttoned his overcoat and stood alone. In a snowstorm, red hollyberries, thoughts, he stood alone. Women said: He is lonely ... fighting ... fighting ... eight years The name of an iron man goes over the world. It takes a long time to forget an iron man. ... ... ... ... ... ...
Daily, and daily, ramifying from high roots, inverted torso  not earth's, not air's, nor indistinct, yet sliding past the full round  of sight's fingers, platinum and focal in the gray plain smoothing  from a creased shore, scrubby arrow down through a life's strangeness,  and from here to there a stone's throw, although I shall have to pay  my penny for the chance, and hang my birdbag, my muddy coat and snares there  and all my sweet gear and withdraw my hand from the shrubby encavatures,  warm immemorialities of earth's cunny where on the surest urgings I strove  for awhile to nest it, and drop the mossy entablatures, hoarded porous photos  and summer lightnings to pluck from tempered leafage that food I studied  to pay for, more than recompense yet less than visible even at this distance.  Go on, pay up, go over.
<>  This pause and foretaste of eternity:  Time was for us and time returns; but we  To-day guess something, for life's chrysalis, In one transcendent metamorphosis,  Shatters, and wings flash sky-ward, and we see  Suddenly stars! and now no less can be  Declared of life than what the secret is! Yet time returns, and death perchance is long  And time eternal, but the stars that throng  Our skies of silence live beyond control Of death and time, for, guessing at the goal  Of truth, we rise, thro' ringing spheres of song,  And find them glittering steadfast in the soul!&rdquo;
My father was an expert automobilist Once in 1902 in a 5-mile race in Frick Park (Pittsburgh) (There were two men in each car, a driver and a mechanic) An important wire fractured from vibration and the vehicle came to a halt My father seized the ends of the wire in each hand, allowing the current to pass through his body The driver cranked up, leapt back to his seat, grasped the guide bar (this was before steering wheels), The engine sputtered, the car darted forward, and the race was won. Some 28 years later when I had been given a Model A Ford which cost $850 My father was displeased with my driving because I couldn't learn how to double-clutch (To double-clutch you must depress the pedal once while you leave the gear you are in, then depress it again to enter the gear in which you desire to proceed) The smoothness of transition, with no bumping or grinding, achieved by proper double-clutching is the mark, my father explained, of the expert driver.
Let me be prodigal as sun in praising you. I take the peeping angel, frolicking in the branches of Time; The dreamless churchyard on the wings Of this gypsy moth; the face Within the river's mist; the footsteps Of this throbbing flower; water's rapture, leaf's Melody in delirium of sunrise  I take these things as factions in the spirit's lens Through which I look at you. And yet, how can I trust to word's furniture in moving now Within the swarm of mountain worlds Your lightest touch has built for me? It is the ocean's sound of sorrowing, It is the wonder of a thousand singing, It is the world with all loveliness Lost within the moons and suns of it, Beloved, that you are.
Bid a strong ghost stand at the head That my Michael may sleep sound, Nor cry, nor turn in the bed Till his morning meal come round; And may departing twilight keep All dread afar till morning's back, That his mother may not lack Her fill of sleep. Bid the ghost have sword in fist: Some there are, for I avow Such devilish things exist, Who have planned his murder, for they know Of some most haughty deed or thought That waits upon his future days, And would through hatred of the bays Bring that to nought. Though You can fashion everything From nothing every day, and teach The morning stars to sing, You have lacked articulate speech To tell Your simplest want, and known, Wailing upon a woman's knee, All of that worst ignominy Of flesh and bone; And when through all the town there ran The servants of Your enemy, A woman and a man, Unless the Holy Writings lie, Hurried through the smooth and rough And through the fertile and waste, Protecting, till the danger past, With human love.
I wanted nothing to do with them, those dead relatives and parents from another country, another age, but they gathered round like travelling players desperate for somewhere to stay. &lsquo;Go away,&rsquo; I yelled, &lsquo;and take your scenery with you with its footlights, mirrors, collapsable chairs.&rsquo; Life, after all, is not a Bradford theatre with Dad as Marvello in top-hat and cape and Mother in bright Edwardian tights. &lsquo;But you,&rsquo; they insisted, &lsquo;are the last who lived with us, heard our voices, touched our flesh. After you we are only period faces in a pile of fading junk-shop snaps!&rsquo; What could I do but renege and let them share my life for a few more years? How quickly they make themselves at home, swopping their dated anecdotes and complaining when I doze off or turn on the TV.
We in our season like progress and inventions. The inventor is really the invention. But who made the inventions?To what uses Were they put, by whom, and for what purposes? You made an innovation and then did you give it to me without writing it down? Did you give it to her, too? Did I develop it and give it to him, or to her, or to them? Did you quicken communication, Did you central-control?And war?And the soul? Let's not talk about communication any more. Did we deepen our integration ties did we subsequently grow  in strength?in complexity? Or did we think of doing the same things at the same time and do them to each other? And then out of our lovemaking emergence of priests and kings, out of our smiles and twists full-time craft specialists, out of our mouths and asses division into social classes, art and architecture and writing from meditation and delighting from our terrors and our pities &ldquo;of course,&rdquo; you say, &ldquo;the growth of cities.&rdquo; But parallels do not imply identities there is no iron law; we are richly variable levels of heaven and levels of hell; ripples of change out from the center of me, of you, of love the inventor.
Wonder holds these walls. Under destiny destruction Splits castles apart. Gigantic battlements are crumbling, Roofs sunk in ruin, riven towers fallen, Gates and turrets lost, hoarfrost for mortar, Rain-bastions beaten, cleft, pierced, perished, Eaten away by time. Earth's fist and grasp Holds mason and man, all decayed, departed. The soil grips hard. There a hundred generations Of the people have dwindled and gone. This wall bore well, Moss-grey and reddened, the revolutions of kingdoms, Stoutly withstood tempests. That great gate fell ... Magnificent rose the fortresses, the lavish swimming-halls, The profuse and lofty glory of spires, the clangour of armies, The drinking-halls crammed with every man's delight, Till that was overturned by steadfast fate. The broad walls were sundered, the plague-days came, The brave men were rapt away by the bereaver, Their war-ramparts razed to desolate foundations, Their city crumbled down. The restorers lie asleep, Armies of men in the earth. And so those halls are wastes, The old purple stone and the tiles and wood are lying Scattered with the smashed roofs. Death crushed that place, Struck it flat to the hill, where once many a man Brilliant with gold and adazzle with costliest war-trappings, Happy, proud, and wine-flushed, glittered there in his battle-armour, Gazed over his treasures, on the silver and the curious stones, On the rich goods and possessions, on the preciously cut jewels, And on this splendid city of the far-spread kingdom. The stone courts stood then, the hot stream broke Welling strongly through the stone, all was close and sweet In the bright bosom of the walls, and where the baths lay Hot at the heart of the place, that was the best of all ...
Once upon a time when I was about eight Papa took me with him to lunch at the house of Mrs Rshe was very beautiful and gave me two helpings of ice creamafter lunch Papa told me to go out in- to the yard to playI climbed a tree and look- ed in a windowPapa and Mrs R were doing strange thingsthey were lying on the bed and had no clothes onthis was a long time ago but I still see them there doing strange things.
This is Niobe whirling in anguish over her dead ones! gathering the poor strayed limbs. Whirling she sucks them into her they fade through and into her; Her swiftness whirls the air into one large round sob. Now a bitter ellipse wickedly whirling: so tight so crushed by air: so shaped by the thumb of air and levered on humming heels; her pointed head drills the skiey vault: makes heaven's floor tremble!
Why, the water rushed out of that hillside  Mole tunnels burst, Paths were runnels and roads rivers, Turf became marsh-grass And pebbles spun, glistening. Silvery water streaked and flumed Out of that hill. Why does he linger splayfooted, wetshod, Gauntly listening As though the astringency of the rinsed air Weren't pure enough, As though the pungency of the pealed twitter Of plover weren't, Why, in a field of fountains, trying To die of thirst?
She died on a hot day. In a way Nothing was different. The stretched white Sheet of her skin tightened no further. She was fragile as a yacht before, Floating so still on the blue day's length, That one would not know when the breath Blew out and the sail finally slackened. Her eyes had looked opaquely in the Wrong place to find those who smiled From the bedside, and for a long time Our conversations were silent. The difference was that in her house The people were broken by her loss. He wept for her and for the hard tasks He had lovingly done, for the short, Fierce life she had lived in the white bed, For the burden he had put down for good. As we sat huddled in pubs supporting Him with beer and words' warm breath, We felt the hollowness of his release. Our own ungrateful health prowled, young, Gauche about her death. He was polite, Isolated. Free. No point in going home.
The Virgin Mother walked barefoot among the land mines. She carried an old man in her arms. The dove on her shoulder barked at the moon. The earth was an old people's home. Judas was the night nurse. He kept emptying bedpans into river Jordan. The old man had two stumps for legs. He was on a dog-chain. St. Peter pushed a cart loaded with flying carpets. They weren't flying carpets. They were bloody diapers. It was a cock-fighting neighborhood. The Magi stood on street corners cleaning their nails with German bayonets. The old man gave Mary Magdalena a mirror. She lit a candle, and hid in the outhouse. When she got thirsty, she licked the mist off the glass. That leaves Joseph. Poor Joseph. He only had a cockroach to load his bundles on. Even when the lights came on she wouldn't run into her hole. And the lights came on: The floodlights in the guard towers.
Ego is not persona: in childhood He rules the little senses, plays at eyes, Betters the nose, learns warm and soft and cold, Reacts but cannot act. Ego is old: He fights but neither laughs nor cries, Stares but is neither bad nor good. Ego is not narcissus: if in youth He lingers at the mirror, he is clear, Is not in love and never seeks a friend, Makes all dependent yet does not depend, Inspects, indulges, does not fear, Remembers all. Ego is truth. Ego does not desire or acquire, Is not the mouth and not the reaching hand, Dreams never, sleeps at bedtime, rises first, Sees that the hell of darkness is dispersed, Is pale in winter, in summer tanned, Functions alike in ice and fire. Ego domesticated serves the man But is no servant, stands aside for will, Gives no advice, takes none. Ego can fail; Pampered he softens, struck withdraws like snail. Trust him to know and to keep still, Love him as much as brother can.
<> Was very dark I slipped out and went walking; And heard the trees To the summer breeze, And to each other talking. And I heard them say, &ldquo;We have stood all day In  To keep the sun From each little one Who laughed at our feet or hurried. &ldquo;Now every boy And girl and toy Is safe at home, my patience! Why! I and you, As their parents do, Can talk of
Saturday morning, the June sun already hot and white. On the first tee, Detroit Golf and Country Club, the players, the caddies. I am appointed Don Delaney's bag. First, the bets: one hundred dollars a nassau five ways, automatic presses, each player against the others. Then, long drives lost in the light and found on the fairways, explosions of grassblade and sand, the quick roll and curve of the ball from the apron onto the green. On the eighteenth Delaney asks how much club. I tell him, he hits the seven iron perfectly, one putts, wins a lot of money. You've probably forgotten the stories in the national newsmagazines years ago about &ldquo;Dice&rdquo; Delaney. &ldquo;Dapper of dress, genial of manner, loud of voice,&rdquo; he gained his reputation at craps, hustled golf, made the largest independent book in America before his luck ran out. Although I saw wonder when I saw how much could be won with skill and with calculation, I hated his nervous face, his eyes without color that couldn't be still, the broken laughter he feigned as he counted combinations of money in his head. I stuffed the crisp ten dollar bill he paid me into my pocket. I knew where it came from. I knew this much was mine.
Last month, where the old log-bridge is laid O'er the woodland creek, in the belts o' the shade, To the right and the left, pink-packed, was made  A gloaming glory of scented tangle By the bramble roses there that wade, High-heaped, from the banks with many a braid That, wilting, powdered the ruts, and swayed,  To the waters beneath, loose loops of spangle; Where the breeze that blew and the beam that rayed  Were murmurous-soft with the bees a-wrangle. This month 't is August the lane that leads To the bramble-bridge runs waste with weeds, That bloom bright saffron, or satin seeds  Of thistle-fleece blow at you, hazy: Starry the lane with the thousand bredes Of the yellow daisy, and bud-like beads Of marigold eyes, around which speeds  The butterfly, sumptuous with mottle and lazy; Whereunder the pewee picks and pleads,  On the sumach's tassel that dips to the daisy. All golden the spot in the noon's gold shine, Where the yellow-bird sits with eyes like wine And swings and whistles; where, line on line,  In coils of warmth the sunbeams nestle; Where cool by the pool (where the crawfish, fine As a shadow's shadow, darts dim) to mine The wet creek-clay with their peevish whine,  Come mason-hornets; and roll and wrestle With balls of clay they carry, and twine  In hollow nests on the joists o' the trestle. Where the horsemint shoots through the grasses, high On the root-thick rivage that roofs, a dry Gray knob that bristles with pink, the sigh  Of crickets is heard; and the leaves' deep bosoms  Are pierced, at dusk, with a bird's quick cry, A passing bird that twitters by: And the frogs' grave antiphons rise and die;  And here, to drink, come the wild opossums: And here, to-night, will you and I  Linger and lean while the great moon blossoms.
That night the whole world mingled,  The souls were babes at play, And angel danced with devil,  And God cried, &lsquo;Holiday!&rsquo; The sea had climbed the mountain peaks  And shouted to the stars To come to play: and down they came  Splashing in happy wars. The pine grew apples for a whim,  The cart-horse built a nest; The oxen flew, the flowers sang,  The sun rose in the west. And 'neath the load of many worlds,  The lowest life God made Lifted his huge and heavy limbs  And into heaven strayed. To where the highest life God made  Before His presence stands; But God Himself cried, &lsquo;Holiday!&rsquo;  And she gave me both her hands.
Down the street young Harlem In the dusk is walking In the dusky dimout Down the street is walking Shadows veil his darkness Shadows veiling shadows Soft as dusk the darkness Veiling shadows Laughter Then a silence Silence Then laughter Shadows veiling silence Silence veiling shadows Silence and the shadows Veiling Harlem's laughter Silence No one talking Down the street young Harlem In the dark
<> To bang in the face of the air, With never a window and never a blind For fear the world will stare. The world may come to peep and pry For never a thing to hide have I And never a care. What would I do with roof and walls, Cupboard shelves and rooms and halls, With stairs to climb and floors to clean, With bits of glass to stand between Me and the sun, Me and the sky? Never a stick nor stone have I, Never a lamp to call me back. All I want is a twisted track Into the woods Over the hill, And a bed of leaves to hold my pack When day is growing still. All I want is a quiet place  Mist and moon And stars In my face.
The cornfield is a gold comb or a sunned fleece the wind grooms to a shadow or perhaps a cloud the wind kites is trailing shadow miles behind as a bride trails broad muslin veils in daylight outside though already she's being led with a light tread along the aisle.
Think, at this hour In the blue snow, How the heart was cold In the frozen year: How we would gather, If we could, In the stone wood Of the soul's weather Something stronger Than known words, Than blind desire, And to burn longer: And found two things In a dark hour: Man's mortal love, And a closed door.
From my loitering as a child In paving-square and field And from my stone-still tongue Time is unsealed. The ages are unstrung By water from a Triton flung And the world finds its heart Which was not always young. I cannot tell what art Set the grave spring to start In whose old pipe and stop Time plays no part. But where green eyes look up, Eyes that are blind with sun, Uncertain fingers grope Around the vine-leaved cup. There little children run And climb the singing stone And their sweet dialect Is learnt by none. Shadows and leaves infect The brooding intellect Beneath whose tongueless wave Those lives are wrecked. But they low music have Winding and gold and grave. Time's measure they can set By light, by love. And in the sun-thrown jet: &lsquo;Sweet moment, sweet!&rsquo; and &lsquo;sweeter yet!&rsquo; Cry, make the foiled eyes clear, The parched lips wet.
<> The mounds of the cities. The dust of the tombs. All that. Slow: distant: shimmer of flocks On gentle mountain: softer than forest: Pouring from the vale like cloud: Ranging: mild: herds of heaven: Sunherds: driven by rainy hounds: East breath from high land: south Fire wind of the waste: tawny: Eyelash shadows in the vast: Herdsmen, focus of sun-circle: Center of nearer night's rim: Godstar bright in the blue dusking: The pot ceiling of flame's house: Warm to hands: remember rivers Where the yellow god rises: Nightmist rises out of earth: Mother of men: mother of rivers: Bowstring thrums in the dry autumn: Deer bleeds, swung by the hocks: Fires, feasting and flute playing: Pelt soft for the child's tumble: Night: enter the still woman: Rest in cavern under the boughs Silent: hear in the late dark Sigh and siffle: the snow wind: Come down then to the dark ocean:
Do not ask where we go from here Nobody knows Some think they do but nobody really knows anything about anything We are only gurgles in the stream and the stream doesn't know where it is going either It is just going It is just going with its nature as far as that will take it And with its nature it has to take along a horde of gurgles who are forever asking where they are gurgling to Everything is going beautifully nowhere
I carry the white head with me and stare at it eye to eye. I'd say it's a bobcat, not an opossum, I'd say it trembled for half an hour once in a sweet gum before it jumped; I'd say an opossum had softer teeth, a flatter jaw, I'd say that anger drifted through the species, that we were lucky we learned it from the cats. For my part I sit on a silken couch, there is a bolt of extra cloth in the cellar once the stain covers these cushions. If I had a tree it would be a cottonwood, one long trunk, to claw my way up, to hump and then pull, a narrow limb, covered with leaves, for my two eyes to hide behind, my eyes and my shoulders. Love is the opposite, some kind of love, maybe tenderness, maybe regret. I dig my claws in, the pads would be enough but I have nails; I scream  that is my way I watch the curtains blow. It takes a year for the flesh to go, for rage to be reduced to fluff; some time next summer I will be bleached ah Yorick, I know you well, you carried me in your pocket, ah opossum, I carried  my pockets are full, they are like cheeks; oh bobcat, bobcat, you were betrayed, you are unloved, you rage at yourself, you are an accomplice; oh bobcat, you are in grief and frightened it is your death you lick, you are humiliated, the stars discarded you, the clouds withdrew. For a year you shook, the leaves of the cottonwood curled up as if the ground had lost its water. I know it so well, for a year I shivered, and sighed, oh rabbit.
I identify, tonight, with certain insects. Paracelsus, first off: What a shocking bad hat! I am especially mesmerized by Walter the Penniless (there he goes with his eye out) and charmed by the convulsionaries of St. Medard. I suffer the general migraine, the dumb oracle that speaks. I am looking for someone named Stormy or Natasha, Dew Drop or Lily Ma Vie. I cry out: Pardon me but what is your precise address and don't be quivery! And, does your mother know you're out? I identify with Father Hell and Dr. Fludd, or A. Fluctibus, the Rosicrucian and sometime friend of Sir Kenelm Digby son of Sir Everard Digby who was executed for his participation in the Gunpowder Plot, later known as  He gave his wife, the beautiful Venetia Anastasia Stanley, a dish of capons fed upon vipers, according to the plan supposedly laid down by Arnold of Villeneuve, in the hope that she might thereby preserve her loveliness for one hundred years. I identify, tonight. I know not what ails me, but I find that I feel no more pain. Methinks that a pleasing kind of freshness, as (if) it were a wet cold napkin, spread over my hand. I identify, I cry out.
Little Master Home-from-School, This is the Parkland you must rule. What does it feel like to have a father for a fool? Your father mortgaged the estate, Lost his money, blamed fate And shot himself through the head too late. There's a father for a fool, My little Master Home-from-School. Why does Auntie wear such funny hats And invert her sentences? Now that's Positive proof she must be bats. Why has Parker got all the horses out for me? Why doesn't Ma meet the train as usually? Here's hoping they give us shrimps for tea. Little Master Home-from-School, Your Ma lies dead, she lies too cool, She's stone cold dead of a broken heart, the fool. Jingle-jog the horses go, And Parker's thinking what I know: Here comes Master Home-from-School That had a father for a fool.
I who of all women of God Was fruitless, useless; I who crept Like a wind through children leaves I could not nod; I who untouched sat and slept On boughs, in caves, an empty wind That could not suckle fields, although it wept; I who was nothing, not evil, not kind, Now that you sin, am like an apple, So pressed with love to the rind. This day the flames have come like dogs To tear and bear away my flesh, But in their jaws I laugh like spring in logs. The hounds of flame now wag and stretch To greet the maid who comes to wed, And now your wives conceive in me by ash. You shall not find me with the dead, Having mothered your sins and fires At dawn I arise from your bed.
In the dark Before the tall Moon came, Little short Dusk Was walking Along. In the dark Before the tall Moon came, Little short Dusk Was singing A song. In the dark Before the tall Moon came, A lady named Day Fainted away In the Dark.
Jerome sought truth and knew the art of teaching; Soon his reward was meeting Roman wives Who sat before him in his grassy cave, Humble, yet with raised breasts and restless eyes. Their amber-studded ears could not retain Sky-riding Plato, nor strict Origen, Starry Plotinus, careful Cicero  The Saint's great learning was a wraith of words. The women gazed at him and gave him money; He left them staring, naked in their beds  Jerome stormed eastward to a friendless desert, A blasted hell-raised plain beneath the moon: There he unearthed a heathenish black skull, And later, snared and hypnotized a lion. The skull received his teachings gratefully And bared its teeth whitely at life, at death; The Saint, inspired by hope, struck at the lion, Thrust out his eyes and spoke to him in Greek: First dressed his wounds, then taught him rhetoric. He grew to love the beast, nor thought of women
Yellow stones and brown, white-brown and bone-yellow  in the swash of the shallows dropping to greens intimating safety,  vision's liquor tapering to darker drink but not lost, the wake settling to an unbraided dispatch of cold annealings,  of released levies, after which the knee-grooved cell with its register  of the week's intercessions: <>   <>   The prince stands close at hand, the Friend,  slabs of his identity lean or resist in cloud-roll from the straits, his advance guard having made reconnaisance  and taken up vigilance  eroded yet ground-set, sheltering also Emerson   what here comes in on all sides goes forth redoubled and without commentary,  outcomes tiding to beginnings! Sheltering also my attempt to release  that peak sunk in the hidden, that one center of the hidden for my finding.  Set close to the jabbering land yet inviolate, barely lifted clear, incomparable:  pride of the prince translated here for replanting, preachings here struck dumb  within the dense focus let  the accessible bury the accessible and comparisons will take care of themselves.  Sorrow, there is a river, great path beneath your adamantine path,  tugging it like a midwife then breaking on these shores in its own birth.  And joy, there is a blackbird who will navigate its way to this washed margin  and waking you in the morning even you had not imagined, will have you speak.
The cricket pitch is a glowing strip, calenture betrayed by reticulation. Carpet over concrete. Fluorescent green. The ball should bounce with regularity though tears and nicks give some hope to the bowler on what should be a batsman's paradise. The matrix of the streets read in the fragments of head-drawn mud. A gannet on a truck tyre, purple swamphens stalking the outer limits of bulrushes that know no inland. Already the Council is filling it in. The swamp, they say, is rising, the suburb sinking. The fine print hints that I'm avoiding the issue or even incapable of exploding the truth. OK, then I'll say it, but with another's voice: &lsquo;The lonely heart's withered away.&rsquo; Satisfied? We walk crisply, out of the picture. I've been trying to remove all trace of moisture from my thought and body. Depriving one does not unfortunately mean depriving the other. To remove all trace of moisture both the mind and the body need to be ambidextrous. Head-banging to the Ramones in a hothouse on a forty degree day, staying awake for three days on ice from Hawaii, pulling the plunger out of a pick stilled in your vein, donating your tear ducts. Laughter helps. Hyper-realism: the glass blower collates flecks of his inner world and forgets they're part of him. A yacht in a snow storm, the lunar meltdown as love blackens the walls of his mouth. His body a cylinder overfilled with gas. His breath as dry as a blowtorch. She has a part in this. So damned considerate he is she thinks. He'll even chop the rhythm about to free her. So damned considerate he is she thinks. Maitre d'hotel plies them with drinks. Maitre d'hotel sees to their needs and lisps to the bellboy, gives a sly wink to his wife not far enough away but cosy on the telephone. Look he says look, I bet you can see it from there, the heart is lonely, the heart is withered away. Funny, the drinks haven't even wet their lips.
As iron sharpens iron I sharpen the face of my friend so hard he sings out in high delicate notes. A struggle for mastery to most speak powerful beauty would run any attention or kindness clean out of town in angry rags. Ringed by darkness the heart pulsates. And power comes in like lightning. A lion in the room, fair and flowing twists with unsparing eyes. Whitely the glance runs to it and away. But let it talk its golden talk if we don't understand it. Grabbed by remote music I'm frightening myself. Speak steadily as is needed to stare down beauty. That calms it.
Born off an alley in the Shaw district  certainly not Colonel Shaw of &ldquo;Glory&rdquo;; died in his pajamas on the can  no music when they found him; &ldquo;Sunday Morning&rdquo;  his face on the bathtub, a left temple bruise. A dude, even in the old days, at Dunbar, Howard; docent in his twilight: theatrical: loved live performance. In love with my mother, my uncle's friend, and so, with his manners, never got over that love, didn't speak of it, though I wear his cufflinks and pins from his tuxedo. We were in the Sheraton, he'd forgot his medication, held all he knew at the time in the fine knuckles of one hand; this was right after Christmas, colder in the nation's capital than any museum. Docents, when young, recite the facts; as they grow older, improvise. Those knuckles, select jewelry from every tradition, style at the wave of a hand, buried, not far from here: &ldquo;one more colored regiment in the soul of a man.&rdquo;
Not all rats live in sewers Some of them dwell in 100,000 dollar rat's nests on the Alameda and drive to work in a Mercedes laboratory rat white You wouldn't even know they were rats on the mailbox it says Mr. Rodent As big as a coffee table book (The only book in the house) he spends his time nibbling ratboy in a rathouse with its cheesy rat kitchen or scampering on a rat sofa or in a bed of rats Or you might find him at the Ratskeller wetting his rat whiskers on rat soup &ldquo;my favorite drink&rdquo; said This shareholder rat there he go old bureaucratic rat investor in rattraps where people live like rats As years went by he gained more status until he became the esteemed Doctor Rattus Crashed a tomcat convention and demanded to be put on the banquet This even woke up Scrounger or Mr. All Claws, the toastmaster tomcat catnapping on the dais after a night of pre- convention howling &ldquo;whaddya say, boys&rdquo; said the thrice decorated rat scrapper &ldquo;rat cocktail rat of the day rat a la carte or rat mousse?&rdquo; The other cats being democrats cast their votes by secret ballot gulp!
Down through the woods, along the way That fords the stream; by rock and tree, Where in the bramble-bell the bee Swings; and through twilights green and gray The red-bird flashes suddenly, My thoughts went wandering to-day. I found the fields where, row on row, The blackberries hang black their fruit; Where, nesting at the elder's root, The partridge whistles soft and low; The fields, that billow to the foot Of those old hills we used to know. There lay the pond, still willow-bound, On whose bright surface, when the hot Noon burnt above, we chased the knot Of water-striders; while around Our heads, like bits of rainbow, shot The dragon-flies without a sound. The pond, above which evening bent To gaze upon her gypsy face; Wherein the twinkling night would trace A vague, inverted firmament; In which the green frogs tuned their bass, And firefly sparkles came and went. The old-time woods we often ranged, When we were playmates, you and I; The old-time fields, with boyhood's sky Still blue above them! Naught was changed! Nothing! Alas! then tell me why Should we be? whom the years estranged.
It seems you must grow into your death slowly, as if it were a pair of new shoes waiting on the closet floor, smelling of the animal it came from, but still too big too stiff for you to wear. Meanwhile you dance barefoot your shaky dance of pretence, and we dance with you, the pulses in our own wrists ticking away. In this small truce the body waits, having waged war on itself for years. You say the water tastes of flowers. You steal on tiptoe past the closet door.
I want to be Like the man who descends At two milk churns With a bulging String bag and vanishes Where the lane turns, Or the man Who drops at night From a moving train And strikes out over the fields Where fireflies glow, Not knowing a word of the language. Either way, I am Through with history  Who lives by the sword Dies by the sword. Last of the fire kings, I shall Break with tradition and Die by my own hand Rather than perpetuate The barbarous cycle. Five years I have reigned During which time I have lain awake each night And prowled by day In the sacred grove For fear of the usurper, Perfecting my cold dream Of a place out of time, A palace of porcelain Where the frugivorous Inheritors recline In their rich fabrics Far from the sea. But the fire-loving People, rightly perhaps, Will not countenance this, Demanding that I inhabit, Like them, a world of Sirens, bin-lids And bricked-up windows  Not to release them From the ancient curse But to die their creature and be thankful.
Overhead the wren builds in the ruined mudcup of the swallow and a stone pilgrim bears another on his shoulder. I sip at the step like an animal at a waterhole. Here water swallows itself unravelling its knotwork between ice-ages, as the sea's slippery pages turning forever at the edge of the mind. It flowers with a small sob on a powerful stem from a tap-root deep in a broken earth, a pulse almost flesh, when the scalpel reveals the drumming loneliness of the heart. Just to look is healing, to stand in the porch of summer and stare through turbulence into the dark.
One day, quite lost, riding my bicycle, I turned into a gateway where a sign in English read NURSERY, and I rode between rows of African violets and banana trees in big pots. The red-blossomed gold mohar tree shaded my face, and bars of neem-tree saplings fell past me. And then I saw through leaves the children laughing at me, sitting in their circles or playing in the sand, for this place was indeed a nursery, the greenery only incidental ornament to shade their faces. And then their mothers came toward me with open arms to swoop their children up, a river of love and colorful saris gold-fringed and blue, and I wished I too were a small child with such a mother coming toward me, gleaming and ripe with sister inside her.
<> <> I  <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <>
Who's this out there with your face and not your hair? Images detached from mirrors float through the room, cross minds and corridors, come between you and the shadow on the wall. That's when you see her, or is it him, with your nose but not your brow. Your wife asks, &lsquo;What has happened to you? Did you get a haircut?&rsquo; For the invisible things you see affect your looks, the form and not the shape of your face. His, or is it her, parts are yours, but they do not add up to who you are, and you too are no longer you. Sometimes, the other when she's a woman, walks with a left- foot shuffle and turns around a quarter-circle when afraid just like you. Clones subtly gone wrong make you wrong, unmake your sense, change your toilet habits as if you're in a different time zone, you develop knots in your fingers and you feel sudden streaks of orange heat across your chest.
PICKERSI am the Silent One,MEERUT CHAPEISaying nothing,HAITI Knowing no words to write, FORDFeeling only the bulletsKOREA STRIKERSAnd the hungerCHILD And the stench of gas ALABAMADying.LABOR NEGROESAnd nobody knows my nameSUGAR But someday, CUBAI shall raise my handHAITI And break the heads of you UNEMPLOYEDWho starve me.BONUS MILLIONSI shall raise my handKOREA And smash the spines of you MEERUTWho shoot me.MEERUT CHILDI shall take your gunsCHILD LABORAnd turn them on you.LABOR SCOTTSBOROStarting with the bankers andBONUS GERMANthe bossesHAITI COMMUNISTSTraders and missionariesKOREA Who pay the militarists POORWho pay the soldiersSUGAR Who back the police FARMERSWho kill me CHILD BLACKAnd break my strikesLABOR And break my rising  AFRICAI, silently,HAITI GRAPEAnd without a single learned wordBONUS Shall begin the slaughter PICKERSThat will end my hungerKOREA JAPANESEAnd your bulletsBLACK And the gas of capitalism CONSCRIPTSAnd make the worldHAITI My own. JOHANNESBURGWhen that is done,SUGAR MINERSI shall find words to speakMEERUT Wait! HAITI UNEMPLOYED MILLIONS CALIFORNIA CHERRY PICKERS STRIKING MINERS ALABAMA SUGAR BEET WORKERS INDIAN MASSES SCOTTSBORO SHANGHAI COOLIES PATTERSON SUGAR BEET WORKERS COLONIAL ASIA FRICK'S MINERS CUBA POOR FARMERS JAPANESE CONSCRIPTS WORKERS JOHANNESBURG MINERS CHAPEI ALABAMA NEGROES OXNARD SUGAR BEET WORKERS INDIAN MASSES BONUS MARCHERS FORD STRIKERS HAITI
bronzed fire among the cold of cold, she was happy moments &amp; clear fields. she was touch &amp; yellow softrose with eyes that begged of sleep, eyes that penetrated the cold of cold. g.c. was lover &amp; giver searcher void of fear. distances would be her metaphor from cleveland to afrika over ocean &amp; desert travel expressed the search in her, highlighting the afrikan in her. just around her 8th season g.c. passed through devastating hurt, resulting in early burial of her man. this is not talked of. her ancestors demanded that she not be imprisoned with dead thoughts or warm memories. she was destined to be searcher void of fear and cold seconds should not detour a softrose with eyes that begged of sleep. often she was happy moments &amp; clear fields, she was sun-riped and ready for war indeed ready for love.
Rain: and over the thorned, cliff-eaten, Ridge-broken hem of the east Dawn slits its murky eye. Two thousand years. And the Tomb-breaker Rose from his nightlong ruin, Up from the raveling darkness, Rose out of dissolution, Heaved off that sealing stone, looked out, Looks out. The faithful follow. This day the neighboring churches Clang up the summons. The faithful rise, Slosh through the drench to the steep ascent. Eight days back spring foundered, Shook off the wintry hand, came on, Comes on, under the downpour, Splitting its blind-eyed buds.
When Levin mowed Mashkin Hill there were moments of happy self-forgetfulness. When he talked to a peasant who believed in God, Levin realized that he too believed. In the modern world there aren't any peasants. They don't cut hay with a scythe, or the women rake it in windrows. Now all that work is done by machines. Now the farmer comes home like anyone to find that his wife has had her hair done, and that they're dining by candlelight, the children having been fed. And there is no God for Levin but the quietness of his house.
 As a face at a bricked-up window,  Or the banging of a door in the desert,  This: &lsquo;Poking your nose in everywhere!&rsquo;  &lsquo;Me?&rsquo; &lsquo;You I give you warning:  &lsquo;&rsquo;F I catch you in my dreams again,  &lsquo;I&rsquo;ll break your neck next morning!&rsquo;  Some things have to be believed to be seen.  ... Such dreams as lay our being bare  And show us what we truly are     Bliss to wake from,  Even into the prison of care    We sleep to break from.  I dreamed alas, I only dreamed   That things were other than they seemed ...   A cracked, stained, old Inn ceiling   And an early cup of tea and     All right, Michelangelo.    &lsquo;I have been here before&rsquo;     I: I, my ancestor.   Did anyone ever have a boring dream?
A made world; an artifice; shiny, spooked: in the right light you could actually see through it. The right light was rare; well they knew it! They believed in grin and go; hook, don't get hooked. Bread and circuses, unbelievable; helicopters, flumes. Satyagraha? You have only to ask. Millions were still content to grunt and bask in designer spas, pink jacaranda rooms run up a moment before, out of nothing. Power bursting all round like drunken sonic booms for those who had ears to hear earwax took most of that. We teased their sleazy code, our drills went in and gouged the viscous looms they'd programmed. It's the earth, green. Smell! Look!
I like things my way every chance I get. A limit doesn't exist when it comes to that. But please, don't confuse what I say with honesty. Isn't honesty the open yawn the unimaginative love more than truth? Anonymous among strangers I look for those with hidden wings, and for scars that those who once had wings can't hide. Though I know it's unfair, I reveal myself one mask at a time. Does this appeal to you, such slow disclosures, a lifetime perhaps of almost knowing one another? I would hope you, too, would hold something back, and that you'd always want whatever unequal share you had style enough to get. Altruism is for those who can't endure their desires. There's a world as ambiguous as a moan, a pleasure moan our earnest neighbors might think a crime. It's where we could live. I'll say I love you, which will lead, of course, to disappointment, but those words unsaid poison every next moment. I will try to disappoint you better than anyone ever has.
Ere Mor the Peacock flutters, ere the Monkey People cry,  Ere Chil the Kite swoops down a furlong sheer, Through the Jungle very softly flits a shadow and a sigh   He is Fear, O Little Hunter, he is Fear! Very softly down the glade runs a waiting, watching shade,  And the whisper spreads and widens far and near. And the sweat is on thy brow, for he passes even now   He is Fear, O Little Hunter, he is Fear! Ere the moon has climbed the mountain, ere the rocks are ribbed with   light,  When the downward-dipping trails are dank and drear, Comes a breathing hard behind thee   It is Fear, O Little Hunter, it is Fear! On thy knees and draw the bow; bid the shrilling arrow go;  In the empty, mocking thicket plunge the spear! But thy hands are loosed and weak, and the blood has left thy cheek  It is Fear, O Little Hunter, it is Fear! When the heat-cloud sucks the tempest, when the slivered pine-trees   fall,  When the blinding, blaring rain-squalls lash and veer, Through the war-gongs of the thunder rings a voice more loud than all   It is Fear, O Little Hunter, it is Fear! Now the spates are banked and deep; now the footless boulders leap   Now the lightning shows each littlest leaf-rib clear  But thy throat is shut and dried, and thy heart against thy side  Hammers: Fear, O Little Hunter this is Fear!
Finding the measure is finding the mantram, is finding the moon, as index of measure, is finding the moon's source; if that source is Sun, finding the measure is finding the natural articulation of ideas. The organism of the macrocosm, the organism of language, the organism of  to propagate a fourth, the poem, from their trinity. Style is death. Finding the measure is finding a freedom from that death, a way out, a movement forward. Finding the measure is finding the specific music of the hour, the synchronous consequence of the motion of the whole world.
Pierrot is dying;  Tiptoe in, Finger touched to lip,  Harlequin, Columbine and Clown. Hush! how still he lies  In his bed, White slipped hand and white  Sunken head. Oh, poor Pierrot. There's his dressing-gown  Across the chair, Slippers on the floor...  Can he hear Us who tiptoe in? Pillowed high he lies  In his bed; Listen, Columbine.  &ldquo;He is dead.&rdquo; Oh, poor Pierrot.
Someone identical with Dante sits beside a stone. Enough is enough is enough of. It's odd that your hand feels warm (snow carefully falling). It's odd that the page was torn just where the snow had begun. There was never very much. There is more (less) than there was. Today it is 84, 74 and 12 and light and dark. We are nowhere else. His smile fell to one side. Here and there it was very light and dark.
If calendars are square holes, something has slipped a round-peg late March morning into this opening. A New Year's Day smelling of wet root? I half look for crocuses, glad not to find. We're wrong enough already. By way of omen, we're one second late. Astronomers ticked it onto the last minute of the dead year. It's their accounting for our eccentric rotation. As if one tick could change us back to time. And yet in time  in time enough all seasons would drift loose but for such finicals; as they did once in Julian time, the vernal equinox precessing through the centuries toward June. We can learn to be more accurate than we have been. Even corrected we're wrong. If that tick's true, this day rings wrong to feeling. A New Year's Day smelling of wet roots! Let the dog run it as if gifts were free. I thumb a forsythia bud: is it too soft for this side of sun shadow? I mean to know. I get the pruning shears and cut some stems to see if they will force. Indoors again, I put them in a vase and the vase on the mantel still decked out with holly, the last dry scratch of Christmas. If this starts let the dog shed I may myself go bald on gullied lawns and leather apples shrivel in the stubble of all season gone to random. Just as it felt inside that astronomers' tick added to the rung year, correcting zero.
Splendidly generous these days, O Town and Chance, on your pedestrian you squander fun and money fun and fuck and money like water through my fingers and teach me, &ldquo;Don't cling! something will turn up.&rdquo; But Muse, do you also whisper in my ear a new song, otherwise than my gloomy sermon. Tell me a popular song a gay one the Americans will sing as by they pass the while I blush for pride.
Through the white chiffon that covered her we whipped her with our eyes until she crawled the floor in heat. When she got up, disrobed and shook the wall got wet. The lute that led her shimmy stung her thighs. Swish of red hair on the floor, twitch of buttock, breast line clean in shake  she danced us into war and back and when the fiddle tied her to a rock she wiggled free. Her legs were wild as pillars to a Persian lost in wind. When far strings tore her from our sight what vain trout circled in our wine? We swam out into the smothering night praying for rain to wash the smoke away.
Drifting from above, the palms seem to sink willingly into the saffron ground, all I can map is the marble veins of rivers turning static, the island coastline retreating like a hem from the sargasso patches of Caribbean. I think of you  of an Almendares curb last night, El Greco shadow spilt across the street, and over the tracks stapled to the weeds below your open bedroom window. Covered in cobwebs of humid wind, we slapped at unreachable mosquitos as Havana's tenements collapsed around us, enclosed us like the yellow of old books or the stucco walls of a hollow chapel. You confessed you live ankled in the sand of a revolution, watching an unparted sea, marking tides and learning currents that will carry you through the straits to my door, blistered and salted, but alive. You said you want silence, you want to leave the sweep of the labor trains in your window, the creak of your father's wheelchair in the hall searching for a bottle of pills he will find empty, and the slam of your eyelids forcing sleep. The tires are ready, bound with piano wire, the sail will be complete with the linen scraps your mother will stitch together after midnights when the neighbors are trying to fall asleep. Last night in Havana, your face against your knees, your words drowning with the lees in an empty bottle of bootleg wine you clutched around the neck and will keep to store fresh water.
God knew he strove against pale lust and vice,  Wound in the net of their voluptuous hair: God knew that to their kisses he was ice,   Their arms around him there. God knew against the front of fate he set  A front as stern, with lips as sternly pressed; Raised clenched and ineffectual hands that met   The iron of her breast. God knew what motive his sad soul inspired:  God knew the star for which he climbed and craved: God knew, and only God, the hell that fired   His heart and in it raved. And yet he failed! failed utterly! No lie  Of Hell, that writhes within its simmering pit, Sank deeper down than he, who, with the cry,   &ldquo;Now shall I rest from it!&rdquo; Died; was remembered, haply, for a day;  Who hoped to rise rolled in the morning's rose, The flame of fame, and still lies laid away   Where no one cares or knows.
Dusty, bruised and grazed, and cut about a bit, but cheerful, twenty men in white are demolishing an old stone house by karate. They attack the worst part: the thick cemented fireplace wall. What a concert of chops is conducted by him in the helmet, with KARATE INSTRUCTOR across his back and Union Jacks and ideograms along his sleeve: a deep-breathed plot of timed and buttressed energies jabbing one bare hand and two bare hands and one bare foot and two bare feet and one bare head at stone: the pivot man, swarming with badges, swings on two friends' shoulders, clutches their necks, leans back with knees above his head and like a spring uncoils two smart sharp whacks from heels of steel, and the wall keels.
My stamped mother used to fling to me All stones lead to home Go easy on the turtle pie gored down at doom temperature Cast a cold and dirty style on every yellow leaf of lassitude glistening beneath the grappled fly My stamped mother used to fling me and I her lump of muck would fling back all the riveted bones I could dandle on my wasted plea the chink of meat we knew that linked us to the junk going by
If from the earth we came, it was an earth That bore us as a part of all the things It breeds and that was lewder than it is. Our nature is her nature. Hence it comes, Since by our nature we grow old, earth grows The same. We parallel the mother's death. She walks an autumn ampler than the wind Cries up for us and colder than the frost Pricks in our spirits at the summer's end, And over the bare spaces of our skies She sees a barer sky that does not bend. The body walks forth naked in the sun And, out of tenderness or grief, the sun Gives comfort, so that other bodies come, Twinning our phantasy and our device, And apt in versatile motion, touch and sound To make the body covetous in desire Of the still finer, more implacable chords. So be it. Yet the spaciousness and light In which the body walks and is deceived, Falls from that fatal and that barer sky, And this the spirit sees and is aggrieved.
<> Rain whitens the dead sea, From headland dim to sullen cape Grey sails creep wearily. I know not how that merchantman Has found the heart; but 't is her plan Seaward her endless course to shape. Unreal as insects that appall A drunkard's peevish brain, O'er the grey deep the dories crawl, Four-legged, with rowers twain: Midgets and minims of the earth, Across old ocean's vasty girth Toiling heroic, comical! I wonder how that merchant's crew Have ever found the will! I wonder what the fishers do To keep them toiling still! I wonder how the heart of man Has patience to live out its span, Or wait until its dreams come true.
Ho, God be here, is Christ, my lord, at leisure? Blessed St. Peter, to my king present This alabaster box which I have sent, And if he ask how it may do him pleasure, Tell him I hear that he hath endless treasure, But hath not vessels half sufficient. And in this box are many more content, Wherein of grace he may bestow large measure, Within my spirit his knowledge he may place, Light in my mind, within my will his grace, Truth in my judgement, quickness in my wit, Merit in memory, love in my heart. This if he do, I hope by seeing it, Ten thousand may themselves likewise impart.
Was it the proud full verse of his great sail that gave America Columbus minds? Martian badlands are the west for minds that cannot rest in watching schooners sail beyond the Golden Gate. The Gate's a sail suspended in its arches like the minds stretched under listening dishes to hear minds unknown that might make men and gods set sail for life. By interstellar mulls and voes they dream of starships shuddering to shore. Microminiaturized, their corded bales. They hear and bear a poetry of voes and mulls that pounds and champs and strains; their shore is all lean-tos, goodbyes, slipways, and bales.
And here face down beneath the sun And here upon earth's noonward height To feel the always coming on The always rising of the night: To feel creep up the curving east The earthy chill of dusk and slow Upon those under lands the vast And ever climbing shadow grow And strange at Ecbatan the trees Take leaf by leaf the evening strange The flooding dark about their knees The mountains over Persia change And now at Kermanshah the gate Dark empty and the withered grass And through the twilight now the late Few travelers in the westward pass And Baghdad darken and the bridge Across the silent river gone And through Arabia the edge Of evening widen and steal on And deepen on Palmyra's street The wheel rut in the ruined stone And Lebanon fade out and Crete High through the clouds and overblown And over Sicily the air Still flashing with the landward gulls And loom and slowly disappear The sails above the shadowy hulls And Spain go under and the shore Of Africa the gilded sand And evening vanish and no more The low pale light across that land Nor now the long light on the sea: And here face downward in the sun To feel how swift how secretly The shadow of the night comes on ...
You cannot see the horns from where you sit, only another row in common black. When their clear melody comes in to represent a grieving heart, it will do so as a brook, rushing over stones, approximates a flock of birds rising, or as the peacock sounds like human speech. Now the empty instruments are raised. I open the first cadenza, the weight of my arms and shoulders striking the keys, keys in turn hammering the hidden strings, driving triumph from the concert grand: and when the multiple voices join, when the horns, in that famous passage, surprise you, it seems we've touched the vocal center of the world. The audience a blur on my right, musicians on my left, I face into the wings, across the keyboard and its broad extension. Playing, I have no more choices to be made. Playing, I am no one. A child sits on the round, embroidered stool, screwed to its full height, a box over the pedals for her feet. The wooden lip is raised and she taps at the row of teeth. Suddenly, a passage from memory, and a bird startles into its territorial cry; then she hesitates, tries an accidental  this is the hard part, the new part, she doesn't like to make mistakes. Thinking his opinion matters, the teacher clicks the rhythm with a pencil, but I would like to move those fingers by remote control, to make her go ahead, take a chance, play  seems to grow impatient, waiting, as the tired upright waited for me in the damp Victorian parlor, a secret under its fringed shawl, the songs in the fat book almost in reach  I didn't simply stop getting better. Pushing a stone, one cannot stop on a hill. The dancer's legs, the poised embouchure want to be part of a sleeping animal. I can still name the train's declining note, the pitch growing flat as it recedes; on the street, in a crowd, I can duplicate the chord implied beneath a random noise  so much music in the universe! In the practice halls, or in the deadened air of their small carrels, apart from us, musicians are laboring, themselves the instruments  it is a service; and like the tired wife who never meant to foreswear her chosen joy, I merely gave a lesser portion of myself, poco a poco until my hands no longer strained against the leash; and then no longer could outrun my eye; and soon, soon, I could not even bear to listen.
Passion of fire that sears my hungry heart Deep with the image of thy shining face, Clothe me in dreams that breathe the magic part Of olden wraiths and many a by-gone grace! Hard to the realms of dim, forgotten days, When first I lived and spent my numbered years, Spirit of mine trips down the garland ways To love-born moments void of earthly fears. In sportive joust I stood thy pledg&eacute;d knight, Keeping the faith with my victorious arms, Or when there gleamed the crimson battle light Thy heart of love made easeful war's alarms. Old days are gone, but love renews each age, Letters of gold on God's eternal page.
Nowadays not so much I don't know why maybe we don't care for company or dread the beggar with the dagger at our throat but then it was done with a thumb or a sign ideally where they could or had to slow a sliproad a roundabout or layby you'd follow the heft of your sack up into the cabin and watch the asphalt splay below or the wipers try to clean it clean it at your right would sit the shaved ex-wrestler the HGV man done for GBH who mentions the three youths in the nightclub who made a big mistake and fell through an upstairs window backwards for their pains it seems he'd still like to get his hands on the magistrate that sent him down the very hands which tighten round the tiny steering wheel as though to plunge it through the chassis or pluck it like a daisy ... but he knows you're on his side and he's regretful that now he has to turn off so he drops you beside a field which grows an endless crop of nothing the look of liver p&acirc;t&eacute; combed and in no time a Latvian reins his van into the layby and tells you of the beings from a star beyond our telescopes who minister to his petrol supply they are stern but kindly and have our interests at heart or at the jewelled pump which serves them for a heart his abstruser claims are authorised by longish Latin quotes and there's a prayer he knows can change meat into vegetable since Abel died for eating flesh ... now it's dark and you're standing somewhere like Scotch Corner let's call it double-dark midway along the journey of our life you feel you've not advanced an inch or else some smiling Zeno's engineered your route the headlights lighthouse past you without time or thought to read never mind admire your cross-hatched serifs in black biro and that strip of cardboard what does it smell of? bananas so your guess is that it's used to travelling if the next car stops if not the next the next one after that you'll leave it there to ornament the kerb
&lsquo;Cwm Berllan, one mile&rsquo; is the message written  At the highway end on the old mute sign Where the narrow lane is stretching  Between brier hedges down and down. Dare I risk that way in an Austin?  So winding and steep, too rough to try: &lsquo;Cwm Berllan, one mile:&rsquo; is clear on the signpost   What's down in Cwm Berllan, say I? Such apples are there. that old Cantre&lsquo;r Gwaelod  Never knew cider with juice sweet as theirs. And when the birds return from the south land  All the colours of paradise branches will bear. The blackbirds are singing. And yon, like a serpent,  The river is sliding shallow and clear. Every kind of delight is down in CwmBerllan, The home of my heart is at the lane bottom   No, better I don't go down now, for fear ...
You often went to breathe a timeless air And walk with those you loved, perhaps the most. You spoke to Plato. You were native there. Like one who made blind Homer sing to him, You visited the caves where sirens swim Their deep-indented coast.  With us you seemed A quiet happy sailor come of late From those strange seas you best could navigate, Knowing a world that others only dreamed. Almost we looked for spray upon your hair, Who met you, silent-footed on the stair, Like an Elysian ghost.  So on that day You left us on a deep withdrawing tide, We dared not beg you, with one sigh, to stay Or turn from your discoveries aside.
Minstrel, what have you to do With this man that, after you, Sharing not your happy fate, Sat as England's Laureate? Vainly, in these iron days, Strives the poet in your praise, Minstrel, by whose singing side Beauty walked, until you died. Still, though none should hark again, Drones the blue-fly in the pane, Thickly crusts the blackest moss, Blows the rose its musk across, Floats the boat that is forgot None the less to Camelot. Many a bard's untimely death Lends unto his verses breath; Here's a song was never sung: Growing old is dying young. Minstrel, what is this to you: That a man you never knew, When your grave was far and green, Sat and gossipped with a queen? Thalia knows how rare a thing Is it, to grow old and sing, When the brown and tepid tide Closes in on every side. Who shall say if Shelley's gold Had withstood it to grow old?
Not our good luck nor the instant peak and fulfillment of time gives us to see The beauty of things, nothing can bridle it. God who walks lightning-naked on the Pacific has never been hidden from any Puddle or hillock of the earth behind us. Between the mean mud tenements and huddle of the filth of Babylon the river Euphrates; And over the tiled brick temple buttresses And the folly of a garden on arches, the ancienter simple and silent tribe of the stars Filed, and for all her gods and the priests' mouths God also moved on the city; or a certain young tribesman come down from the mountains of the north Espied him in the eyes of a temple harlot; Whom presently, as then, when the priests have choked him with perfume some prophet like a desert camel Shall talk with in the ridges above the rock-tombs. Dark ships drawing in from the sundown and the islands of the south, great waves with gray vapor in your hollows And whitening of high heads coming home from the west, From Formosa or the skerries of Siberia and the sight of the eyes that have widened for the sky-peaks of Asia: That he touched you is no wonder, that you slid from his hand Is an old known tale to our foreland cypresses, no news to the Lobos granite, no marvel To Point Pinos Light and the beacon at Point Sur, But here is the marvel, he is nowhere not present, his beauty, it is burning in the midland villages And tortures men's eyes in the alleys of cities. Far-flown ones, you children of the hawk's dream future when you lean from a crag of the last planet on the ocean Of the far stars, remember we also have known beauty.
He wanted to learn a discipline, but he couldn't decide which one would make him free enough to plead for more. She said she was really skinny then, a Saturday newspaper. I heard they had an interest in salt and other yellow crystals, things they believed were as palpable as puppies on a pillow. I like the root cellar, especially when it's fetid. Do you see these boots? They're made for stalking the dreams you wish you had when you were a child. Cast a golden lie, she said, and all your household nicknacks will turn into little gods; shiny figurines sweating incense and wisdom in the cluttered rooms of a vast surburban night, its turnstiles of burning leaves. What kind of clamps did you mean? The ones whose hooves carry you to the Library of Forbidden Looks? Or have I been aiming for the wrong station all along? like an insect in a wind tunnel. Some prefer effigies to the real sting. Others like to seal the monkey stench rising from their motors. Who cares if they know how to navigate or not? What about us? We're just stalled erosions waiting for fate's fat man to release us from our frozen tunics and cement noose. Let the puddles recite their visitations from the liars above. Let the violin show you its long black tongue, the one that flows across the wires wrapped around your neck. I was a Coptic radio broadcasting ashes through a vendor's hair. I was a bird caught in a church bell, a machine smothered in attention's grease. I was the porous stone clanking in the rim of your visor, but you were the sky whose colors became rigid with memory, the water that did not part when I entered it, the mirror whose embrace is final. Someone served us this pail of slippery wishes before, and we neither nibbled nor sipped. Perhaps you're no longer full of burning tires. Maybe you'll even hear us when we fall.
My old friend has departed, he is making the inevitable journey Not, I think, to dark Erebus, but to a happier place Reserved for the good &amp; the great, for our friends the Greek &amp; Latin poets. And I believe that such a land exists though I am uncertain of its lo- cation Because, idiotic as they are, the gods must have provided it for such as he. Memory must be my comforter, he gave so much to remember As when one night long ago we sat on the roof of Dunster House Watching the stars pursue their courses And he related to me much wisdom from the philosophers And no doubt I related to him frivolities about young female persons. We reflected on the human condition And reviewed the lives of our heroes, we spoke of the sorrows of poets How those girls made Catullus so miserable, how Ezra drifted into ir- reality How Fran&ccedil;ois got himself strung on the gallows, and Kleist dis- patched himself and Henriette with two bullets. But we did not jump off the roof of Dunster House, though nothing would have been easier Because there were things we both had to do with the lives the gods had entrusted to us, such as the fashioning of words into poems and sentences. And later we did those things according to our powers, his great and mine small But each of us found joy in the doing and in the bond which en- dured between us.
My eyes catch ruddy necks Sturdily pressed back  All a red brick moving glint. Like flaming pendulums, hands Swing across the khaki  Mustard-coloured khaki  To the automatic feet. We husband the ancient glory In these bared necks and hands. Not broke is the forge of Mars; But a subtler brain beats iron To shoe the hoofs of death (Who paws dynamic air now). Blind fingers loose an iron cloud To rain immortal darkness On strong eyes.
What did the caterpillars do last time the Phoenix died? They beat their breasts with a hundred fists till one of them espied the egg the ashes incubate. Then, sure that wings would flame again, they broke their bread on a mulberry leaf and out of himself each wove the sheath from which he'll burst on flaming wings after the peace of a season's sleep, after the peace of a season's sleep. What did the little children do when Christ was last time crucified? Each hid beneath a mulberry wreath and on one another spied. For they were playing Prisoner's Base and as the teams hid face to face the only thing that mattered much was which was caught and which would catch before the evening grew more dark, before the earth and air grew dark.
The March wind turns up suddenly and shreds loose canvas on the awnings. Inverted flames of cloth billow and long to escape the world of definitions. Even people's heads seem to be on fire, grow lion's manes, echoing some comical shape of terror. These are territorial wars. You half expect them to rise and spit at each other just as the rain is doing now, to arch their backs and growl. Well, here are cars hunched and growling, part of the same weather, low clouds learning to bellow with best or worst. You should have expected this. You should have worn your coat or slipped the brolly into your pocket. They are so neat, so easy to carry. The weather has given notice it intends to change. It thinks of human folly as a faint tickling under its feet. The street entertainers are out. One old beggar blows his harmonica so faintly the sound is blown back in his face. A boy with a recorder stands before a figure of Mercury, with his schoolcap on the ground like an abandoned toy. The ones that interest me are a pair dressed vaguely as musketeers, in puritan hats and rose pink gowns. They wield long sticks. They do nothing but stare at the growing crowd, till someone puts a coin into the box, when a wild mechanical movement seizes them and they are frozen once again in attitudes of sinister aggression. Their faces mimic something, yet are empty. A girl runs between them and poses. The crowd laughs at her silly expression. I'm merely a reporter whose truth lies in diction clear as water. In the pool which I imagine by my shoes I try to see my features, read my eyes. It ripples. My face is indistinguishable, the water darkens like a bruise.
It's 5 after 4 a.m. and nothing but my own motion stirs throughout the waiting air the rain completely purged earlier and all day long. I could call you now but that would join you to this restless lying down and getting up to list still another act I must commit tomorrow if I ever sleep if I ever stop sleeping long enough to act upon the space between this comatose commotion and the next time I can look into your face. I hope you're laughing at the cans of soup the house to clean the kitchen curtains I will wash and iron like so many other promises I make myself: to sweep the stairs down to the front door and to answer every letter down to no thanks. My own motion does not satisfy tonight and later in the daylight I'll be speeding through the streets a secret messenger a wakeup agent walking backwards maybe walking sideways but for damn sure headed possibly southeast as well as every other whichway in your absolute direction
And so you discovered the secret of generation At last. Though not of generosity. I saw and heard and smelt, For you had given me eyes and ears and nostrils, Of a sort. And later, with the help of a mirror, I saw myself. I have my feelings. They were hurt. You could have taken a little more trouble, Considering. Considering that you managed to bestow a soul on me, Or what, having subsequently learnt a number of words, I suppose is a soul, You could have put the bones in their proper places (You could have robbed a better class of grave) And moulded the flesh less casually. But no, you say, you're a scientist, Not one of those arty types, not an aesthete, Not concerned with flimflam. Your feet are the right way round, you tell me, Count your fingers, and your blessings. Everything is relative, you told me, But I have no relatives, Genesis devoid of genealogy. Plainly you cannot be my father, More plainly not my mother. Hence, in all modesty, I ask for a companion. Not a belle, not like your bride-to-be, Or even your late lamented housemaid. But at least a creature of the other sex, Since sex you also gave me (No complaints on that head, but who can see it?)  With similar imperfections, and a few extra. Then, since everything is relative, I'll be quite a beau. So for I know the perversity of your nature  No flimflam. Just the essentials, doctor.
Never to really wake up, this is some people's burden that those of the tireless sort are unable to understand, when all we want is to lie around in a state of collapse. First and last, I told my mother who also suffered from it, never use the word &ldquo;tired.&rdquo; It's like &ldquo;depressed,&rdquo; a dead end  just saying it brings it on worse. It's as if some people don't have an outer crust of energy that rides over the lake of exhaustion, a level of weariness that is always there, threatening to rise up and swamp us, or that we are always in danger of sinking into. All our kind wants to do is lie down and rest and sleep, bone tired, dog tired, but never like a dog, the lively breed that wears out people like us, jumping up as they do, alert and ready to go, tails wagging.
tonite,  abt an ol woman, so vain she surrounded her self w/ many mirrors It got so bad that finally she locked herself indoors &amp; her whole life became the mirrors one day the villagers broke into her house, but she was too swift for them. she disappeared into a mirror each tenant who bought the house after that, lost a loved one to the ol woman in the mirror: first a little girl then a young woman then the young woman/s husband the hunger of this poem is legendary it has taken in many victims back off from this poem it has drawn in yr feet back off from this poem it has drawn in yr legs back off from this poem it is a greedy mirror you are into this poem. from the waist down nobody can hear you can they? this poem has had you up to here belch this poem aint got no manners you cant call out frm this poem relax now &amp; go w/ this poem move &amp; roll on to this poem do not resist this poem this poem has yr eyes this poem has his head this poem has his arms this poem has his fingers this poem has his fingertips this poem is the reader &amp; the reader this poem statistic: the us bureau of missing persons reports that in 1968 over 100,000 people disappeared leaving no solid clues nor traceonly a spacein the lives of their friends
It holds us, gently, together. It presses out, against the eardrum. It presses in. It curls in the palms of our hands but holds nothing to itself. It steps over the sock flung onto the chair, the blouse on the floor. When we touch, it moves aside a modest medium that solid things displace. The children running down the street punch through it, leaving a cut-out shape of each position hovering behind them for an instant. It is made of round spinning things, but it will adjust to a rectangular space such as a room. It's the only company the old man who stays in his long underwear all day has. He comes onto the porch at noon to get more. People identify it by objects it surrounds. They call it &ldquo;atmosphere.&rdquo; What people see is themselves: they approve or they don't, they leave for good or they come back. Air is innocent of such judgments, having no personality to protect. It has a simple habit: it fills anything. It occupies entire hotels in the off season. It is drawn to emptiness as to a question it answers. Only a person can puzzle it: the vacancy interior, locked behind the eyes. It stays whole, flows around the wall, the knife. We can change it as much as ourselves, or another person: very little.
The full September moon sheds floods of light, And all the bayou's face is gemmed with stars Save where are dropped fantastic shadows down From sycamores and moss-hung cypress trees. With slumberous sound the waters half asleep Creep on and on their way, twixt rankish reeds, Through marsh and lowlands stretching to the gulf. Begirt with cotton fields Anguilla sits Half bird-like dreaming on her summer nest Amid her spreading figs, and roses still In bloom with all their spring and summer hues. Pomegranates hang with dapple cheeks full ripe, And over all the town a dreamy haze Drops down. The great plantations stretching far Away are plains of cotton downy white. O, glorious is this night of joyous sounds Too full for sleep. Aromas wild and sweet, From muscadine, late blooming jessamine, And roses, all the heavy air suffuse. Faint bellows from the alligators come From swamps afar, where sluggish lagoons give To them a peaceful home. The katydids Make ceaseless cries. Ten thousand insects' wings Stir in the moonlight haze and joyous shouts Of Negro song and mirth awake hard by The cabin dance. O, glorious is this night. The summer sweetness fills my heart with songs I cannot sing, with loves I cannot speak.
Now wherefore hast thou tears innumerous?  Hast thou not known all sorrow and delight Wandering of yore in forests rumorous,  Beneath the flaming eyeballs of the night, And as a slave been wakeful in the halls  Of Rajas and Mahrajas beyond number? Hast thou not ruled among the gilded walls?  Hast thou not known a Raja's dreamless slumber? Hast thou not sat of yore upon the knees  Of myriads of beloveds, and on thine Have not a myriad swayed below strange trees  In other lives? Hast thou not quaffed old wine By tables that were fallen into dust  Ere yonder palm commenced his thousand years? Is not thy body but the garnered rust  Of ancient passions and of ancient fears? Then wherefore fear the usury of Time,  Or Death that cometh with the next life-key? Nay, rise and flatter her with golden rhyme,  For as things were so shall things ever be.
When that prime heroine of our nation, Alice, Climbing courageously in through the Palace Of Looking Glass, found it inhabited By chessboard personages, white and red, Involved in never-ending tournament, She being of a speculative bent Had long foreshadowed something of the kind, Asking herself: &lsquo;Suppose I stood behind And viewed the fireplace of Their drawing-room From hearthrug level, why must I assume That what I'd see would need to correspond With what I now see? And the rooms beyond?&rsquo; Proved right, yet not content with what she had done, Alice decided to prolong her fun: She set herself, with truly British pride In being a pawn and playing for her side, And simple faith in simple stratagem, To learn the rules and moves and perfect them. So prosperously there she settled down That six moves only and she'd won her crown  A triumph surely! But her greater feat Was rounding these adventures off complete: Accepting them, when safe returned again, As queer but true not only in the main True, but as true as anything you'd swear to, The usual three dimensions you are heir to. For Alice though a child could understand That neither did this chance-discovered land Make nohow or contrariwise the clean Dull round of mid-Victorian routine, Nor did Victoria's golden rule extend Beyond the glass: it came to the dead end Where empty hearses turn about; thereafter Begins that lubberland of dream and laughter, The red-and-white-flower-spangled hedge, the grass Where Apuleius pastured his Gold Ass, Where young Gargantua made whole holiday.... But farther from our heroine not to stray, Let us observe with what uncommon sense  Though a secure and easy reference Between Red Queen and Kitten could be found  She made no false assumption on that ground (A trap in which the scientist would fall) That queens and kittens are identical.
The bands that roamed the underpass were shaggier, the chutzpah-flaunting palace-squatters headier, the chainsaw chandlers' caravans road-readier, the jackets of the would-be guards were baggier. The fit, the bad, the bold were mercenaries with starry bedroll and a wad of banknotes. Zombies in camouflage commanded bhang-boats, crewing the hold with burnt-out missionaries. Satellite anchormen were never silkier, marathon-runners kept in step, broke bridges, amazons cut a ball from every braggart. But phosphorescent seas were never milkier, fantastic sunsets burnished shell-ripped ridges, a sculptor slapped with joy his marble blackguard.
Where I stand, there I reign. What is not subject is objectless. Who knows how far my train of skirts skirts other craters, on their knees without evening or morning? When it is there could ever be an end to power I do not need to stride to tell you or straddle a rock with a slap or scoop fistfuls of dust to stiffen the sift  it is all time down the red drain to me, planted here in full pluck, my grizzle bald as a dollar, set, I said set, and who is going to move me?  Only the great god Venus who dibbled me into the rubble, saying Water yourself! He laughed and left, but trails his grim throne still, I know, without servants, through sulphur, over slag, endlessly I would say. Who loves him? Some are standing stones, like me. Some lie flat as dolmens. All wait for nothing but the hiss of storms, the crimson seething, the particle clatter, the lightning-shattered smog of ochre, the settling down and the rising up, the impregnated immobilities! God of the sun and ash, I take you as you take me, I breathe, I sweat, I dash my invisible waves as every stone does, squeezing its roused seas up and out as if they could find beaches of meanest marram long dreamed.
Show me the man that died properly last year and I'll show you flying fish in Timbuktoo; tell me who sat with his pearly hands stuck in a bowl of water rather than dishonour and a long white bed, like they used to do. Goodbye twelve more months: this engineer drove smack into a pylon the very last night but did not catch fire and we conscientiously wither and hardly ever burn, snuff it with hardly any light. Schlapsky's done it; down the plughole, fear sat like a sponge on his shoulders. And now the fashion is to die King-Arthurish, aware of the calamity of hotter hopes, all topped and tailed, in a cold passion. Last night I got this cold obstruction, here, so I went to bed and took the television and there on Midlands Today this policeman just said Nope when they asked him if someone could blow up just by making the decision. But somewhere in town, determined to disappear, someone had stopped and said, &ldquo;And now I go&rdquo;  and gone; hauled up by angels as if, in the old way, she were to be turned into a tree, or wind, or stars, or crow.
Every lunchtime they'd leave you a piece of  Now I can imagine the white of the paper bag and the small yellow doily under the plate in the afternoon half-dark. And I drag from my memory not your room but mine (or any room that seems to be half-dark) to construct a world we may meet in. Here is the door to the kitchen, here is the sideboard, the mark on the tablecloth and the print of my thumb on the page. Here nothing is known, everything dissolves to noise or to music (but what is the difference?) a music which says (so must mean) things, that solves the pathos of cake on a saucer or the tiny cosmic hum that rings an old woman's hand as she moves in the kitchen like a conductor, waving her notes into place, weaving the slender sound of paper and footstep. We start as with lines on a score, the  with your blank childhood face and the space between lines measuring distances.
That the poet &lsquo;does not number the streaks of the tulip&rsquo; you saw was a fallacy, yet when paradoxical Imlac claimed that &lsquo;to a poet nothing can be useless&rsquo; you concurred, and out of scraps of art and life and knowledge you assembled that crackling auroral panorama that sits on your Scotland like a curly comb or a grinning watergaw thrown to meteorology, your bone to the dogs of the ages. So much to be numbered!  &lsquo;the red huckleberry, the sand cherry, and the nettle tree, the red pine and the black ash, the white grape and the yellow violet, which might have withered else in dry seasons.&rsquo; To be forgotten is driest. Names rain things up. You took that hazard of naming, letting the drops fall on the desert of uninterest of those with &lsquo;a taste for Frontiniac&rsquo; but not for the glass of Esk water or the inhuman fountain of stone that pours in a marble ear its endless formless message where &lsquo;schiebt ein Krug sich ein, so scheint es ihr, dass du sie unterbrichst.&rsquo; And yet you let the jug of clay dip in the flow. A dead child or a busker or a bobbin-winder cries through the raised beaches and the disinterested eternity of the foraminifera. Somewhere in astonishment you would set man, short-range or long-range confrontation or kinship with all the world he changes as it changes him, the greater changes he grows into making now, the greatest like faint stars in the drift of smoke of thought.  Midges in cigarette-smoke! That's what you know, where it comes from, turning a page or writing one in your clear hand still, sitting by a cottage in a small country.
Children are dumb to say how hot the day is, How hot the scent is of the summer rose, How dreadful the black wastes of evening sky, How dreadful the tall soldiers drumming by. But we have speech, to chill the angry day, And speech, to dull the rose's cruel scent. We spell away the overhanging night, We spell away the soldiers and the fright. There's a cool web of language winds us in, Retreat from too much joy or too much fear: We grow sea-green at last and coldly die In brininess and volubility. But if we let our tongues lose self-possession, Throwing off language and its watery clasp Before our death, instead of when death comes, Facing the wide glare of the children's day, Facing the rose, the dark sky and the drums, We shall go mad no doubt and die that way.
lift lid of shed peer into endless shedness below a kind of blue sky shedness a kind of endless shedness like the corners you find in sheds like your shed has more corners than you thought possible endless shedness you always find things in your shed that you never put there that your parents never put there that your children never put there endless shedness try this now with your own shed and you will find the (endless shedness) things that were never put there endless shedness endless shed eess sess eeee less shed less hed endless shed endless shed
All does draw back from the Atlantic There is no hope for France The hole which the moon made when it pulled out of the Pacific is where all people now properly should hang, on the edge of Los Angeles Paradisio has nothing any longer to do with hell
I needed to write a note to her. I'd needed Train times and clothes and magazines for weeks now But today to write a note to her and it's true I scarcely knew her. Overnight, it looks like, I must have become orbited, and sprouted Oceans that would whisper as she passed me, Or waver, glad and sideways, none the wiser, Then furrow, dimly knowing in the daytime. I needed to write a note to her, to begin A scale I could master quickly and descend on Once risen on and learn its minor too, For bone Sunday. I wrote a note to her That splattered into rhyme against my wishes. So I scrunched it up and said if it hits the bin There's going to be a relationship. It missed it, And meaning nothing circled to a halt, An avoided iceberg, the origami for  I was settling down to a skim through magazines When it started to creak apart like an old fist Too weak to clench for long, and by the time The creaking stopped a note was there again, A pale green leaf as smooth as now my brow was, A second draft, an effort which not only Got written, it got folded, licked and posted, And triggered what had had to be discharged While there was time to hold it, have and miss it. But the first note has been stooped for and unravelled, And ever since hides in a drawer in wrinkles, Brown and furred and saying it told me so Like a dear retainer whose love I could never dodge And wouldn't now. Which explains why I would never Tell him we both ended up with others In time, and without his or any English.
So what's he doing now, Mahony who took his wife and children on the Grand Tour again this time to do it right? Presumably he's not as foolish as I was therefore will not make  it seems, he left his money in the hands of someone who absconds. In Venice he gets a cable, RETURN IMMEDIATELY. MOST URGENT. So he dashes off, boards the first mailboat, will have no peace. His fortunes are lost, kissed good-bye  down the bottomless drain of perfidy. His accountant is off for a new life in America. &ldquo;I guess it happened often  that sort of thing. In  you'd better watch out who you trust.&rdquo; Indeed, I think, turning to face the squalid papers of a misspent life  one that makes Mahony's sad course look like one unbroken upward ascent of triumph such a career as Professor Olson drew with squeaky chalk on the blackboard where brash light fell upon us as if blocked by prison bars, not the mullioned windows of the Ivy League or Chicago. Far far West of Melbourne I mourn the fortunes of Richard Mahony, and more than one of my own.
Not at all predictable, strawberries. Begun earlier, this would have been  nothing out of the ordinary,  nothing more than a justification for the slow creep of a not so long ago  dormant strawberry. Though now, after abstinence, brought about in uncertainty and delay, they have begun their creep, in bursts. Transplanted, they shall reach the edge of grass, the threat of tangling, eventual choking. We can only survey their movements, attempt  to curb frustration with our coaxings. If we do not witness, a hope should be  held in their eventual fruiting.
Merchants.of the sea and of finance (Smash the plate glass window) The dead face is the true face of Washington, New York a misery, but north and east the carpenter obeyed topography As a hand addresses itself to the care of plants and a sense of proportion, the house is put to the earth Tho peopled with hants, New England Move over to let the death-blow in, the unmanned or the transvest, drest in beard and will, the capillary Seven years with the wrong man, 7 yrs of tristus and vibullation. And I looked up to see a toad. And the boy sd: &ldquo;I crushed one, and its blood is green&rdquo; Green, is the color of my true love's green despite New England is despite her merchants and her morals
What we are at is pining for our lost   Future. How we are doing that is simple: Slouching beside our low glass tables dressed   In shimmering precious suit from nape to ankle. That's how it was to have been. The walls of silver,   The doors that slish behind, the ultramarine Drink, the apotheosis of the letter   Z in Christian names and the light this clean. Instead it's a sulk we'll have. We're the spoiled child   With centuries for uncles, and those uncles Leaning along the shelves disabused and old   And letting us learn or not from the foul troubles They dumped on us. Well we're not going to bother.   We're going to sit here in our suits and shine, Move and amend and move and adjourn forever,   And pour the green olorosos of the moon, Aren't we, Zardoq, though till the yawn of Time   The rough and the brown and sick make war and changes Backwards into the country, into the storm,   And cluster there by the millpond of the ages.
Tonight the machinery of shadow moves into the light He is lying there not a true invalid not dying Now his face looks blue but all of that small body will more than do as life. The lady radiologist regardless how and where she turns the knob will never know the plenty of pain growing parts to arm a man inside the boy practically asleep
turning your head away just before the trains collide turning your head away to miss the car fall over the cliff. it's simple; we all know what happens if you look. my sister believes if you point a finger at a graveyard that finger rots off. so I never point fingers at graveyards. my hands are always in fists as I'm driven past them, scanning the road for certain death.
A white butterfly in an August garden, light as it may seem among the zinnias and verbenas, fragile among the red trumpeted petunias, is ribbed with steel wired to the sun whose triumphant power will keep it safe, free as laughter, secure against bombardments no more dangerous to its armored might than if the cotton clouds should merely fall.
When I made you, I loved you. Now I pity you. I gave you all you needed: bed of earth, blanket of blue air  As I get further away from you I see you more clearly. Your souls should have been immense by now, not what they are, small talking things  I gave you every gift, blue of the spring morning, time you didn't know how to use  you wanted more, the one gift reserved for another creation. Whatever you hoped, you will not find yourselves in the garden, among the growing plants. Your lives are not circular like theirs: your lives are the bird's flight which begins and ends in stillness  which  this arc from the white birch to the apple tree.
From a telephone box on North Uist I speak to the wrong mother. Lost connections make these islands more like fish, make ferryboats into trawlers catching only last week's newspapers and men with faces. Lost connections push you out of telephone boxes with a bemused smile, your faith in numbers shaken. &ldquo;The beach seemed like the best place to go.&rdquo; Or home. From a telephone box on North Uist a lost connection can form the last line of a witty postcard. It becomes difficult to write home when you miss connections with yourself, facing the lost seas of mirror, empty boats crossing beaches.
I awoke happy, the house Was strange, voices Were across a gap Through which a girl Came and paused, Reaching out to me  Then I remembered What I had dreamed  A girl One whom I knew well Leaned on the door of my car And stroked my hand  I shall pass her on the street We shall say trivial things To each other But I shall never cease To search her eyes For that quiet look
After lunch my daughter picked handfuls of the wild flowers she knew her grandfather liked best and piled them in the basket of her bicycle, beside an empty jam-jar and a trowel; then, swaying like a candle-bearer, she rode off to the church and, like a little dog, I followed her. She cleared the grave of nettles and wild parsley, and dug a shallow hole to put the jam-jar in. She arranged the flowers to look their best and scraped the moss from the stone, so you could see whose grave she had been caring for. It didn't take her long no longer than making his bed in the morning when he had got too old to help her. Not knowing how to leave him, how to say goodbye, I hesitated by the rounded grave.  my daughter said,  And so we got our bicycles and rode home down the lane, moving apart and coming together again, in and out of the ruts.
We watch this mark make time an image of hair thumb women making bread from grain at the backyard. The fruit trees hammer his name in their thumping and the bush comes out. What history, that of drugs, that of love, handclasped in a star, his name. <> jazz ain't enough anymore, poetry neither; making the bread the bread comes out, thumping army bush, machine on machine. Drug Merchant got your baby, won't let him go watch this mark make time: learn to count, <>
No one so busy as you are. Where is that seventh day when you rest from your labour? I arise from sleep to find that you have been all night growing. And by day you are abroad endlessly exploring a circumference by which you are not confined. You have no words yet vibrate in me with the resonance of an Amen. You are strung with light as with nerves across which thought is drawn to deliver intellectual music. Sometimes you are an impulse upon my walls, at others a modifying of unseen organisms, slowly and delicately as a mutation; but always as far off as you are near, terrifying me as much by your proximity as by your being light-years away.
Wavering blue floor of a skiff in the field's river softens a gash of red down the slant wreck of brick, marks the air's gatherings where a language sank and still murmurs. Columns, tasks, burnt sisterings of hands torn away, towering on the lip of sunny dust, shag of spurting grasses, mud of the breeding bank. When I was struck from that tiller it was in service, the overmastering pulled me from it into these alien hours beyond a downsuck that men much better have not beaten. Blue fluency that I'll not fathom, from that city I have come back to pray you never to bear my body towards your beachings again unless you set me down with the other blinking survivors beside the blooded stone.
Your feet could not get colder than this, Your head hung over the stairwell, the carpet-rods Pure slips of gold gone into powdery dark. The shining of things goes down, and always down; The bed is marooned by acres of crackling board. Tonight the house is bandaged like a mummy, But sharp with edges of reflected light. Waiting, here at the stairhead, crowded pictures Char on the walls: cold ashes, distant voices. You grope for them; they are proper to the night, Voices from catacombs, bone Roman voices, Voices chinking tipsily in their cups Or lipping softly down the corridor, Growling in dullness, rising, slipping, falling: Kennelled things. Your ears sing with blood, Alert as if the stars could make frost music Or bats shake silver chains out of black thickets. The voices too are making a bad song Where light might live behind the closing of doors. There is nothing here for you, just the white cold Pressing itself on flesh, on the gold slips Which travel down and down to the powdery dark, To the nothings of velvet, the stupid voices In a long house of thin glass and throaty curtains.
In this painting which hangs in the Hermitage in St. Petersburg (the artist is unknown but the style is Flemish fifteenth century) two aristocratic women wearing elegant silk &amp; brocade dresses are seated facing each other on elaborately carved fauteuils we see them in profile, they are looking at each other as if engaged in conversation their dresses are similar in cut but one is red and one is green as we approach the painting we take the ladies to be sisters on nearer inspection they appear to be twins but when we look very closely they are indisputably one and the same person the same coiffures, the same beaded slippers, the same gold-chain necklaces a small mole (reversed of course) in the cheeks near the mouth the ladies are staring at each other with unconcealed hatred you might say that they are trying to set fire to each other with their eyes their hands are clenched tight in their laps if you linger before this painting for only a few moments you may become hypnotized by the enmity it contains (such hatred, such hatred) you may even feel hallucination stealing into your mind you may imagine that you hear the women hissing at each other (in whatever is your language) one asks, what are you doing inside me that I feel such excruciating pain? and the other replies, it is you who have no right to be in me, I de- mand that you go, I never wanted you, I never loved you, go now, you must go!
What is it like to have just one shirt, To have no money forever, to have nothing Pertaining to men, to begin in dirt And to end in dirt? What is it like? Dirt for breakfast, Breakfast for supper, nothing that does not pertain To misery, to arrive hungry And depart hungry? To have nothing pertaining to love or money, Nothing not dirty and just one shirt, To be so cold when the world is cold That to breathe can hurt. Nothing, I tell you! And what is it like? They can never, ever, ever tell. They squat by the wall; they won't go to school: They will not rebel. This is a rock. You can chip away Till it looks like a man and it can't feel pain And it will not hope and it doesn't want love And that's all you can say.
A man is walking, or appears to walk, Rapidly backwards into the lit town Beyond the darkening platform, where a crust Of light encases him in the dust Of his own translucence, his head a stalk Beside our furious clatter.  These things will cease to matter. A stutter of pale boards, the names of sleep: How soon the semiology of shape And dying fall takes over. Neither past Nor future, we discover here a lost Continent of moments, whose elegy Begins with a drowsy numbness.  Such continents are nameless. A city in the extreme north of China Freezes each year to fifty below zero. It has an enormous Culture Park where snow Becomes a polished lawn and festivals Of sculpture feature houses with ice walls Embedding bits of china  Crowned with ice antennae. Such baroque, such opulence, such darkness. We're on the edge of all that's frozen, formal, Furious and unattainable. The great fantastic trains, like twists of barley, Go nosing forward rather eerily, Even a good marriage  Is more than half a mirage.
Ridged thickly on black bough  And foaming on twig-fork in swollen lumps At flirt of bird-wing or wind's sough  Plump snow tumbled on snow softly with sudden dumps. Where early steps had made  A wavering track through the white-blotted road Breaking its brightness with blue shade,  Snow creaked beneath my feet with snow heavily shod. I reached a snow-thatched rick  Where men sawed bedding off for horse and cow; There varnished straws were lying thick  Paving with streaky gold the trodden silver snow. Such light filled me with awe  And nothing marred my paradisal thought, That robin least of all I saw  Lying too fast asleep, his song choked in his throat.
Only sweet in the middle registers, the fluegelhorn making new band music, each cadenza his solo of spare parts. Signing the contract, unhinged in the voice box, each triplet measured in uniformed police, he prayed for the big horn of attention, and Coltrane came. This was no everyday event: reports of madness with too much technique for the life force, the flow tuned in and broken apart. Infections of the middle ear gave you the inflection you couldn't hear, patterns given in pleurisy, each breath killing your timing until you drowned, went to drugs, the iron body with strings solo.
&ldquo;I am not the prodigal son,&rdquo; I said to my mother who had come to take me back. &ldquo;I'm going to Africa,&rdquo; to see if my face colors her ground, if my sadness thickens Sahara dust and famine, if my wet season rains anything more than sweat. I am not ashamed of searching. But will she welcome me? I've left English grammar, French phonetics, history, anthropology notes, the King James Version. And if not the color of her soil, if my dance is toe-pointed and straight, will she know me even as one lost son? &ldquo;I am not the prodigal,&rdquo; I said more softly. And if I'm told, &ldquo;You're American. Go home. Africa doesn't want fugitives.&rdquo; Or turning from my wheat skin, she awaits seeds deep in famine soil and rainy human seasons, I may find that a change of place is nothing safe, and no other masks or moods can tie back the cord that first fed me blues.
There is time before I go to mention the lily flowering by the door  how, when divided, it multiplies. I'm speaking now of love. There is time to tell you the only story I know: a youth sets out, a man or woman returns, the rest is simply incident or weather and yet what storms I could describe swirling in every thumbprint. There is time before I go to show you the way light slants across a page or through a doorway, as if the darkness too were vulnerable.
glass by glass also wood you look out light and metal crossings up wind head-on for years the streets were lonely always some death in them now what ever there is so many thoughts to ac- cept
There are pictures so old, my little Alma, I don't know why I keep them anymore, they have no record for me. It might be a falseness, or a problem of our privacy, why we didn't live in the real world, as if there was one, but there must have been someone there because we kept saying to ourselves it was real, the world, or someone. I told you one day, as you were going to model, I would only be the happiness before your truest happiness, and there you would spend your life, and you laughed at me. I don't know why I keep these records anymore. I don't know why it's a problem of privacy. I guess I stopped when we stopped, someone who was not the world, whoever that was. Which one comes early with the early light of evening, which is the last early light, and on any day how do you live on? It is too bright for me here, and the birds sing, I don't know their names and don't want to, it is enough that they sing, I look out a small closed room I put myself in and look out at them sing, I can't breathe when I do that. Evening is the one residue of light I can't stand. Actually, a few hours before this I can't stand it. I despise it. I despise what I easily said to supposed friends. It's all my own doing, then they listened. Then they said it back. I hate that backness as I hate the summer evening for giving backness to light. Last light, my eye. I will never see you again, I said that. I will die.
<> paint a flower with a death's head flower with a death's head at its center center with a desert at its center clock with ochre hands its face a sun the sun a multiple sun at 3 a.m. sun of limbs and sun of the lens flower as if it were a limb anemone, rose, yellow marigold gravity a word from the narrative word that bends in the narrative as if suns would flower as sparks of paint then fall before the retinal net fall into actual space space of minarets and streets Says, Here is a word you must erase a word made of particles of paint Here is a word with no points in space The Higgins black ink has dried in its bottles so it's true, as angels have said that there are things of glass light-gatherers, cat's-eyes, keys and bells and that glass is a state of sand It's impossible to hold such a key in your hand and it's light you see traveling through angels of glass  through knells  causing the il- lis- les- the li- lil- lit- forming the l's you're never to understand like the tongues of syllables wreathed in the wells, like tongue-tied and transparent angels The painting wall still stands Studio at night Everything in place
Where my mother prayed for my birth no more confessionals or votive candles or statue of Blessed Martin de Porres. A flock of swans above Belle Isle. Grease in the river and in my hair. A Great Society, the President declares in the football stadium eleven miles from the sign &ldquo;Welcome to Romulus Where Healthy Plants Grow.&rdquo; Why shouldn't my father cheat the wholesaler to sell to the poor at less loss or my cousin sing, &ldquo;Can't forget the Motor City.&rdquo; On a clear day the Mayor replaces houses with weeds, sees the White House.  <> Szabo crushes beer cans on his skull. Unskilled labor's wanted at Eldon Axle. He who soon will need to kill Vietnamese memorizes Malcolm. After the crowd outside the blind pig does not disperse it is difficult to explain to someone who is not there the 101st Airborne at the State Fairgrounds, fifty caliber machine guns mounted on tanks, bazookas. Brush Street at midnight, the child huddled with a toy, eerie silence. Wind brings balm in April, in August hours of lightning but no rain. The power of place, the power to demand an answer from myself, the factories, the girl whose breasts make me wild, the communion of saints, streets. Earth pouring clouds into gray heavens. Much more violence than I know.
The thorn at my back a soft hand, so sharp my cry, the caterwaul of a cat, its belly sewn with rocks.... and then there was nothing, and then there were two babes tolling the sand and scarlet marbling the shallow water I had brought myself to, step by step. The rose willow dropped soiled catkins. I could not remember the road to my father's house. Around my waist my aunt, smelling of emollient, wrapped white silk  I was small, my hair was fair. Together when my uncle died, we scrubbed his mealy skin, picked onion from his teeth, tied ribbons around his wrists and ankles so that he could not walk abroad, could not rattle his traps in our sleep; but at night, when I lay in the sweat and powder, the glove of my aunt's breasts, I heard steps, <> sour milk: nothing can be kept from where it wants to be. Still, I have bound twine around these hands too, have with such slight insult the sweet crimson slit of a fish's mouth emptied these bellies of prayer. That is a good thing. What sounds where it does not belong brings confusion. A good thing. Though among the blown ferns on the path there was this morning a dead sparrow, covered with maggots; and now the carp have grown still and hang in the water like eyes. Under the lolling guelder rose there was a cow, berried thick with flies, its heavy sacs swinging like bells. I filled my tin cup with sweet milk and held it out to the little girl the cream made a satin bow around her mouth; but as I watched, it turned brown. She smiled and put her ribboned foot on mine and said, &ldquo;I hate you.&rdquo; What had I done? The boy was jerking his thumb at me, and someone was watching behind the wall. The fen is frozen, plantain dead, in the bitter air the coarse grasses grieve. Lonely cranes hiss and leave. We carp are not eyes at all, but tongues, the cauled pool's dumb tongues, telling the same sad story again and again  that what begins in brackish waters comes to a butcher's end. I, the sparrow, sing what is lost is lost is less than my nest above the bog where the fat red roots drag and dissolve. None of my eggs hatch; the cuckoo robs me yearly, spilling yolk over the white straw. You were a keen bird as I remember, as I remember less and less. We ring the bells, we with the knotted limbs and sour smells ring the bells to frighten the children away. The flesh is a shallow well: into the dark we drop our buckets, but bring up nothing. At this door I have learned to stand still, to count footfall as coins:  <> <> with hair like a thrush's breast and rose perfume came in with a different man tonight, her finger like a petal on his arm, her smile a crimson wing; he bowed low to her. I would not for the world again have such a fine shoe upon my foot.
Jim Wright, who was a good poet and my friend, died two or three years ago. I was told at the time that we did not lose him. I was told that memories of him would keep him in this world. I don't remember who told me this, just that it was in the air, like the usual fall- out from funerals. I knew it was wrong. Now I have begun to think how it was wrong. I have begun to see that it was not only sentimental but simplistic. I have examined Jim in my mind. I remember him, but the memories are as dead as he is. What is more important is how I see him now. There, there in that extreme wide place, that emptiness. He is near enough to be recognizable, but too far away to be reached by a cry or a gesture. He is wearing a light-weight, brightly colored shirt. His trousers belong to a suit, but the coat has been discarded. His belt is narrow and somehow stays straightly on his pot belly. His shoes are thin and shiny. I think he bought those shoes on his last journey to Europe. He is walking away, slowly. He is wandering, meandering. Sometimes he makes a little circle. Sometimes he pauses and looks to one side or the other. Sometimes he looks down. Occasionally he looks up. He never looks back, at least not directly. Although he recedes very gradually and becomes very gradually smaller, I continue to see all the aspects of his face and figure clearly. He is thinking about something and I know what. It is not the place he now occupies in my life. He cannot imagine that, only I can. He is neither what he was (obviously), nor what he is (for I am quite sure I am inventing that). Is he Jim Wright? Is he not someone else? Yes, he is Jim Wright. No, he is not someone else. Who else could he possibly be? When I die, he will arrive at where he is going. And I will set out after him.
lemme kiss your face, lick your neck touch your lips, tongue tickle tongue end nose to nose, quiet questions ever slept with a man before? hand stroking your back slowly down to the cheeks' moist hair soft asshole eyes to eyes blur, a tear strained from seeing  Come on boy, fingers thru my hair Pull my beard, kiss my eyelids, tongue my ear, lips light on my forehead  met you in the street you carried my package  Put your hand down to my legs, touch if it's there, the prick shaft delicate hot in your rounded palm, soft thumb on cockhead  Come on come on kiss me full lipped, wet tongue, eyes open  animal in the zoo looking out of skull cage you smile, I'm here so are you, hand tracing your abdomen from nipple down rib cage smooth skinn'd past belly veins, along muscle to your silk-shiny groin across the long prick down your right thigh up the smooth road muscle wall to titty again  Come on go down on me your throat swallowing my shaft to the base tongue cock solid suck  I'll do the same your stiff prick's soft skin, lick your ass  Come on Come on, open up, legs apart here this pillow under your buttock Come on take it here's vaseline the hard on here's your old ass lying easy up in the air here's a hot prick at yr soft mouthed asshole just relax and let it in  Yeah just relax hey Carlos lemme in, I love you, yeah how come you came here anyway except this kiss arms round my neck mouth open your two eyes looking up, this hard slow thrust this softness this relaxed sweet sigh.
It isn't me you hear crying, it's a growl from the earth. Look out the devil has lost his head look out! Crouch in the belly of the well  squeeze against the window-pane  hide behind the flash of diamonds  beneath stones in a swarm of flies  oh, hide in the bread just drawn from the oven  you, Poorman: soak into the earth with a thunder-shower! To plunge your face into yourself wasted labour, you are only washed in the waters of others. Slip into a grass-blade: on its vein you will stretch farther than the axis of this world. O birds and foliage, machines and stars, our sterile mother implores and reclaims her children. So, Poorman, so  and is this dreadful, or is it wonderful?  it isn't me you hear crying, it's a growl from the earth.
For the tourists, who stay in the Large new tourist hotels, the Chief tourist attractions are the Other large new tourist hotels. For the querulous and wayward There were once the local monkeys, Who lived in the ancient tree-tops Long before the hotels were thought of. The tourists enticed the monkeys down From the trees with monkey nuts and Breakfast rolls. And the monkeys Scampered across the road and were Squashed by the buses transporting Fresh tourists to see the monkeys. It was not a pretty sight. So now the tourists are confined to The tourist hotels, large and new. They pass with the greatest of ease From one to the other, escorted by porters With large new umbrellas, or even through Underground passages, air-conditioned and Adorned with murals by local artists Conveying impressions of the local scene. After all, the tourist hotels were created Specifically for the sake of the tourists.
I do not know the names of birds Hiding in the tall grass Who rise as one thought As I pass the slope of the hill. They talk about me behind my back Hiding now high in the trees. They look down on me Wingless, clumsy, walking. I am the outcast among the birds. Though we are all dark and glistening Before sunset. They think I cannot speak their language. But each day the foreigner collects words Stumbled upon on the hills Untangled from the sweep of the trees: They say air,light,wing, Home,wind,glide.
what freedom's not some under's mere above but breathing yes which fear will never no? measureless our pure living complete love whose doom is beauty and its fate to grow shall hate confound the wise?doubt blind the brave? does mask wear face?have singings gone to say? here youngest selves yet younger selves conceive here's music's music and the day of day are worlds collapsing?any was a glove but i'm and you are actual either hand is when for sale?forever is to give and on forever's very now we stand nor a first rose explodes but shall increase whole truthful infinite immediate us
I've been walking in circles for what seems like days. They've been playing Paganini, but you know how intermittent the conscious ear can be. How selective. Walking has nothing to do with distance as clearly as Paganini has nothing to do with the violin that plays him hard. How it hurt Jackson Pollock, during his black and white period, to hear the critics say that he was painting black  the gaps and absences were to him; how crucial the distances, the gulfs; how critical each emptiness to each composition. There is that moment in, say, the finale of Beethoven's Fifth, when you hear nothing between the various false endings, so you make your own music, a bridge of silence from one illusion to the next. A deeper and more refined ear Beethoven's ear takes care of this.
Happiness is a capricious girl. Woo her, she flees. Ignore her, she follows. When I was young and alone, Sundays I stayed in my room all day making poetry on the card table, and Tottie, hearing no sound, would tap on the door and ask, &ldquo;Are you all right?&rdquo; And when I answered, she'd go down to the kitchen and bring me sandwiches and milk. I never thought that I was happy then. But now when I look back, I know I was very happy.
How well I know him, old soldier in blue Union suit that might have been fireman's show duds on the day they burned the whorehouse down. Captain of the hosing team, he sprayed crowds, the settees, the porch, but let others scorch handlebars and muttonchops. Not his torch. He'd be damned, maybe, but he'd sin enough, death, fire, and fear, too, at Antietam's bluffs. Under him, I lie in grandfather's house, bird-fat for holidays, deepsick of grouse, television news, lies, repeated rapes by puffing gents with new rights, knowing ropes bounce the way they always did, but more, worse. Framed over faces that mumble news, the day's dirt, his face, distant as a moon, scarred, boot-scuffed, but oddly close, a man who still spits, gruffs, sits ram-straight, though brittle with bad back pain, gutshot by the past, present, and future. Flames braze each brass button. His whores have names. Brothers, fathers, we gaze on him for signals, but cold Buck's merciless, locked to the Eagles.
The hum of the bees in the pear-tree bloom  Penetrated my blood. I looked in her eyes. The gloom  In them did me good. I knew that she was waiting,  Ah she, I knew that she was baiting Her looks, her bearing to me; For all her shyness, baiting  Her looks with desire. And the bustle of bees in the pear-tree bloom, And their subtle, eager booming,  Like a murmur of fire  Passed into my blood.
How does the Autumn in her mind conclude The tragic masque her frosty pencil writes, Broad on the pages of the days and nights, In burning lines of orchard, wold, and wood? What lonelier forms that at the year's door stood At spectral wait with wildly wasted lights Shall enter? and with melancholy rites Inaugurate their sadder sisterhood?  Sorrow, who lifts a signal hand, and slow The green leaf fevers, falling ere it dies; Regret, whose pale lips summon: and gaunt Woe Wakes the wild wind-harps with sonorous sighs; And Sleep, who sits with poppied eyes and sees The earth and sky grow dream-accessories.
let's,from some loud unworld's most rightful wrong climbing,my love(till mountains speak the truth) enter a cloverish silence of thrushsong (and more than every miracle's to breathe) wounded us will becauseless ultimate earth accept and primeval whyless sky; healing our by immeasurable night spirits and with illimitable day (shrived of that nonexistence millions call life,you and i may reverently share the blessed eachness of all beautiful selves wholly which and innocently are) seeming's enough for slaves of space and time  ours is the now and here of freedom.Come
I had a bear that danced, A monkey on a stick, A dog that begged, A cat that moused, And, slouching by a ditch, A rook in black of silk. I had those birds that rode Upon the levels of the cove At late long twilight in the north When the brand of sun still burned Above the shoddy bridges of the Garavogue. I had a boat that beat Up levels of the reed-flagged shore And rock-grained, rack-ruined battlements. I had a boat and traveled with the birds That flew against me in the breath of winds, To each bend of the river its own mews Of samite-backed and sable-legged young swans Who winter from the Bay of Rosses here. I had an island for my own one want, A ring of prophecy and scent, Where trees were sloped upon a moss of turf, One ruined wall that I could sit against And dip a ragged net to catch a fish Of rainbowed armor in the scales of night. I had a love who spoke to me of wars. It was the summer of the fires. Blackout by desolating energy. You silken tatters of the sliding flow, I had your voices and your leafy pools, I have these poisons we must choose.
The veritable night of wires and stars the moon is in the oak tree's crotch and sleepers in the windows cough athwart the round and pointed leaves and insects sting while on the grass the whitish moonlight tearfully assumes the attitudes of afternoon  But it is real where peaches hang recalling death's long-promised symphony whose tuneful wood and stringish undergrowth are ghosts existing without being save to come with juice and pulp to assuage the hungers which the night reveals so that now at last the truth's aglow with devilish peace forestalling day which dawns tomorrow with dreadful reds the heart to predicate with mists that loved the ocean and the fields  Thus moonlight is the perfect human touch
Flames of love licking the rafters with lurid hopes I waited for our meeting that came to nothing, as it used. &ldquo;What a pity the universe isn't practical!&rdquo; I drily said  I have lost my edge of bitterness and when I frankly wailed you gazed at me admiring for an honest ancient knight. So now another evening, aftermath of nothing, with my nerves still raw, I spend without remorse, even without despair, guessing at the interval between this hour and death. Yet automatically  unwilled from time to time I lift my hands slowly and swiftly let them drop again. It has no words.
Then we went to Bunny's house behind the church. And played the Miracles Jesus never did, over and over, memorizing the whorls of the songs for the times when we'd know what they meant. Our fingerprints all over the records, the records all in our prints. We poured that foreshadowed pain into our hearts like blue milk into curved blue bottles with deep stoppers. Set them in our windows to wait for men who brought love or not, but thirsty would lean their fuzzy heads way back exposing dark, strong necks and, unstopping stoppers with sweat-staining fingers, swallow all our blue smokey-miracle milk till we could count our heart- beats and breaks in the deep sinkings and returns of their adam's apples.
The Gambel quail looks like a medieval knight in a plumed russet helmet with lowered visor outlined in white. Every morning in early spring he flies to the top of a cholla, where he can see his mate and the boundaries of his territory. They are monogamous, but at dawn he crows as proud as any barnyard rooster with a harem. And she is a lovely thing, plump and demure in gray and a smooth brown cloche with a plume which bobs above her head as she gathers her chicks, nodding to each in turn, always counting them. Once I saw a pair of Gambels attack a roadrunner who was threatening their chicks. Quail seldom fly, but these came in like two jet planes, low and fast and side by side. The roadrunner was three times their size. They struck at exactly the same moment, a maneuver requiring absolute precision. The stunned roadrunner fell down. They landed quickly and ushered the chicks away, calling  ran after them. By the time the carnivorous giant had regained his breath, his feet, and his dignity, the quail were gone. The pair I know best live in the acacia thicket at the bottom of the arroyo. They have a nest on the ground, hidden by cactus and rabbit brush. If I come too near, he sounds the alarm and they take cover. If I stay, he comes out to harangue me and do battle. He threatens me with death or, at best, banishment from his territory. I hold my ground. <> <> He tries to lead me away from the nest. I know he will sacrifice himself if he must. This is the desert. It has always been his home. I give up and return to the house where I belong, learning from my neighbors in the arroyo to claim no more territory than I am willing to defend.
Can it be, can it be That beasts are of various bravery, Some brave by nature, some not at all, Some trying to be against a fall? I saw a cat. Beside a lily tank, Paved level with the grass, she stood, this cat, Considering her leap. Three times she backed for jumping, gathered tight (So tight, thought landed her already over) And did not jump. And then, After a pause, as scolding humanly Not nervy, eh? We'll see.' She jumped. And what a jump that was! Quite twice as long And high As it need be, Now why Did this cat jump at all, so force herself? There was a path around the tank, She could have walked. Can it be, can it be That beasts are of various bravery, Some simply brave, some not, some taking thought (Most curiously) to cast themselves aloft?
They call it regional, this relevance  the deepest place we have: in this pool forms the model of our land, a lonely one, responsive to the wind. Everything we own has brought us here: from here we speak. The sun stalks among these peaks to sight the lake down aisles, long like a gun; a ferryboat, lost by a century, toots for trappers, the pelt of the mountains rinsed in the sun and that sound. Suppose a person far off to whom this lake occurs: told a problem, he might hear a word so dark he drowns an instant, and stands dumb for the centuries of his country and the suave hills beyond the stranger's sight. Is this man dumb, then, for whom Chelan lives in the wilderness? On the street you've seen someone like a trapper's child pause, and fill his eyes with some irrelevant flood  a tide stops him, delayed in his job. Permissive as a beach, he turns inland, harks like a fire, glances through the dark like an animal drinking, and arrives along that line a lake has found far back in the hills where what comes finds a brim gravity exactly requires.
Oh wild and gentle beast, Immense antlered shape, This morning in the meadow! Like something ancient, lost And found now, promise kept, Emerging from the shadow, Emerging while I slept  Wilderness and escape! You set me free to shirk The day's demanding work And cast my guilt away. You make a truant of me This moose-enchanted day When all I can is  When all I am is this Astonishment and bliss.
they are given to hold close, not air, not each other thin sliver of the crescent moon high up the real world in that air between your knees the song begins to sing after silence your legs break open the final measure close black eyes intent on danger me, of all people birds come down to feed no other business on this earth Is this form too long? Belshazzar left before the end Out of the sea comes Venus to quench one final thirst Is this form too short Love alone could make do with less you taste of fish that swim where no boat ever passes this night conceals no animal body but my own
Snow is irrational and the rare song above the snow insane. Every tree is a personality: each ticks in the night like a human clock. It is as uncomfortable to own more than one clock as it is to own one's name. Why haven't more tellers robbed banks? How come there are so many banks? My brother passes judgment upon me in dreams he has. One involved a bank. I know that more than one question is being asked in the city in the deep middle of the night. I never hear the questions but they are out there being asked. A question's only secret is to ask. When I kissed him I was trying to take the whole thing back. I knew it was time to leave when the dream kissed me: the past is no longer damaged goods. The night sky is bright with its own dark. The train you and I have heard is our train. That is our secret. A secret we share but a secret nevertheless.
The truth is this had been going on for a long time during which they both wanted it to last. You can still hear them in that phase, the north and south laid up against each other, constantly erasing each minute with each minute. You can still hear them, there, just prior to daybreak, the shrill cheeps and screeches of the awakening thousands, hysterical, for miles, in all the directions, and there the whoo whoo of the nightfeeders, insolvent baseline, shorn, almost the sound of thin air.... Or there where the sun picks up on the bits of broken glass throughout the miles of grass for just a fraction of an instant (thousands of bits) at just one angle, quick, the evidence, the landfill, then gone again, everything green, green.... How he wanted, though, to possess her, to nail the erasures, like a long heat on her all day once the daysounds set in, like a long analysis. The way she kept slipping away was this: can you really see me, can you really know I'm really who... His touchings a rhyme she kept interrupting (no one believes in that version anymore she whispered, no one can hear it anymore,  like the different names of those girls all one girl).... But how long could it last? He kept after her like sunlight (it's not what you think, she said) frame after frame of it (it's not what you think you think) like the prayer that numbers are praying (are they ascending are they descending?) He kept after her in the guise of the present, minute after minute (are they ascending are they?) until they seemed to quicken and narrow (like footprints piling up, like footprints all blurred at the end of, at the scene of ...) until  present tense without end, slaughtered motion, kingdom of heaven?  the shards caught here and there  <> <> <> (is it a squeal of brakes is it a birthcry?) (let x equal forever he whispered let y let y ...) as opposed to that other motion which reads Cast it upon the ground and it shall become a serpent (and Moses fled before it), which reads Put forth thy hand and take it by the tail and it was a rod in his hand again  That's when she stopped, she turned her face to the wind, shut her eyes  She stopped she turned, she would not be the end towards which he was ceaselessly tending, she would not give shape to his hurry by being its destination, it was wrong this progress, it was a quick iridescence on the back of some other thing, unimaginable, a flash on the wing of ... The sun would rise and the mind would rise and the will would rise and the eyes The eyes : the whole of the story like a transcript of sight, of the distance between them, the small gap he would close. She would stop, there would be no chase scene, she would be who, what? The counting went on all round like a thousand birds each making its own wind who would ever add them up?  and what would the sum become, of these minutes, each flapping its wings, each after a perch, each one with its call going unanswered, each one signaling separately into the end of the daybreak, the great screech of the instants, the pileup, the one math of hope, the prayer nowhere is praying, frame after frame, collision of tomorrows  No she would go under, she would leave him the freedom his autograph all over it, slipping, trying to notch it, there in the day with him now, his day, but altered, part of the view not one of the actors, she thought, not one of the instances, not one of the examples, but the air the birds call in, the air their calls going unanswered marry in, the calls the different species make, cross-currents, frettings, and the one air holding the screeching separateness  each wanting to change, to be heard, to have been changed  and the air all round them neither full nor empty, but holding them, holding them, untouched, untransformed.
It was good when you were here, I am lonely now. Nighttime is the worst when the light drops out of the sky and the colored fields that were company vanish. I dislike to go out into the dark open but in my empty house is the presence of your not-being, the speech we do not sound, the touch I cannot reach. Surely long ago I wrongly set out toward this familiar encounter with no one at all. During my prime years my country passed me by. I made do. (America alas has not made do.) God bless you who from time to time have brought me peace for a day and saved me from writing only prose while my hair turns gray and may to me God give the grace of the poor: to praise without a grudge the facts just as they are.
Only my own room is gray from morning on those high those closing windows may divide to make an open wall (that's maybe nine or ten feet tall) and when you pulley up the wooden blinds the outdoor cypress trees confront consume caress the (relatively) small and starving eyes that mark your face for love How old is Jesus? for example well the dark bronze fountain boy (behold him) wet perpetual the running water slides his belly loose the snake around his arm supplies the slick delectable the difference the dry parts where his hard fat fingers never reach the area where early light or late the boy is there alone and listening to a sound that is not his
<>  A rollicking song for the morn: It's up and out with a laugh and shout, While the bright sun circles the world about,  And the dew is on the corn, my boy,  The dew is on the corn. Barefoot, brown, with trousers torn,  It's up and out with the morn. A jolly good song for the noon, my boy,  A jolly good song for the noon: It's out and away where the wild woods sway, And the wind and the birds have a holiday,  And whistle an oldtime tune, my boy,  And whistle an oldtime tune. Healthy, happy, a heart of June,  It's out in the woods at noon. A wonderful song for the eve, and my boy,  A wonderful song for the eve: The sunset's bars and a trail of stars, And the falls of the creek a mine of spars,  Or a weft of crystal weave, my boy,  A weft of crystal weave. Hungry, tired, with nothing to grieve,  It's home again at eve. A lullaby song for the night, my boy,  A lullaby song for the night: When crickets cry and owlets fly, And the house-hound bays the moon on high,  And the window-lamp shines bright, my boy,  The window-lamp shines bright. A drowsy kiss and a bed snow-white,  And a lullaby-song for the night.
A man is sitting in a room made quiet by him. Outside, the August wind is turning the leaves of its book. The door is open, everything is disclosed, each leaf, all the voices. The man is resting from the making of the quiet in which he sits. The floor is swept, his books are laid aside open, his eyes are open. All the leaves and voices are outside in the restless wind. Soon he will rise, or take up a book, or someone will enter; Or, perhaps, a leaf will come in across the threshold, or a voice Will blunder through the room, blind and unanswerable on its way elsewhere. But now the room is quiet as the man has made it. Everything in its place is at rest inside the room. And the man is at rest, seeing each leaf, and hearing all the voices.
One who sees giant Orion, the torches of winter midnight, Enormously walking above the ocean in the west of heaven; And watches the track of this age of time at its peak of flight Waver like a spent rocket, wavering toward new discoveries, Mortal examinations of darkness, soundings of depth; And watches the long coast mountain vibrate from bronze to green, Bronze to green, year after year, and all the streams Dry and flooded, dry and flooded, in the racing seasons; And knows that exactly this and not another is the world, The ideal is phantoms for bait, the spirit is a flicker on a grave;  May serve, with a certain detachment, the fugitive human race, Or his own people, or his own household; but hardly himself; And will not wind himself into hopes nor sicken with despairs. He has found the peace and adored the God; he handles in autumn The germs of far-future spring. Sad sons of the stormy fall, No escape, you have to inflict and endure: surely it is time for you To learn to touch the diamond within to the diamond outside, Thinning your humanity a little between the invulnerable diamonds, Knowing that your angry choices and hopes and terrors are in vain, But life and death not in vain; and the world is like a flight of swans.
Saint Harmony my patroness is slight and she has yellow hair and she whispers to my loneliness in a whiskey-voice in my ear. She moves in an idle way putting a foot here and there, her counsel is nine parts dismay but softly ends, &ldquo;Don't you care.&rdquo; And people think the morals of my pug-nosed muse is carelessness and so are mine, but we shall prove longer lasting than they guess. So lightly I speak of her for love of whom my heart will break now she is gone, there is a tear in my blue eyes for her sake.
Thunder. More thunder. Lightning. Thunder. More thunder. More thunder. The rain reaches me through the window nine feet away. I read your letter again. Lightning. More thunder. More. More. More thunder. I turn out the lights. The curtains swing to the left. Rain becomes the coloring of the air. Hailstones attack the roof of my room. Like marbles. More. More. More thunder. I am afraid to close the window. The blue spruce cracks. And crashes among the marbles. Its trunk slashed to the flesh jaggedly. I feel like a woman who says to herself: &ldquo;That kid is leaning too far out of the car. My God. The kid has fallen out. On his head.&rdquo; Then wonders where should she make her report.
My daughter comes to me with her sorrow. She is not yet ten, not yet insistent for her father. As if waiting out a sentence, she sits at the round table, her long black shawl of hair framing high cheekbones. She thinks she is ugly, thinks she has no friends. How can I comfort, what should I try to tell this radiant coincidence of genes? That children can be beasts to one another? That envy eats us from the inside? &ldquo;All great beauties doubted their beauty,&rdquo; I tell her. But why should she believe me: I am her mother, and asked repeatedly for beauty, meaning happiness.
When at that happy pause that holds sweet rest As a hard burden, that it doth belate And make him seem a laggard at the gate Of long-wished night, while day rides down the  west; I, weighted from my toil, and sore distrest In body and soul, the scourge of partial fate, At such sweet pause, to silence consecrate, Came thoughts swift changing fancy had bedrest In colours of desire. I thought on her I never yet have seen, my love to be. I conjured up all glorious shapes that were; And wondered what far clime, by what sad sea She roaming? And what spirits minister? What thoughts, and what vague shadowing of  me? By what far ways shall my heart reach to thine? We, who have never parted never met, Nor done to death the joys that shall be yet, Nor drained the cup of love's delirious wine. How shall my craving spirit know for mine Thine, self-same seeking? Will a wild regret For the lost days the lonely suns that set, Be for our love a token and a sign? Will all the weary nights, the widowed days That sundered long, all point their hands at  thee? Yea! all the stars that have not heard thy praise Low murmur in thy charm&egrave;d ear of me? All pointing to the ending of the ways, All singing of the love that is to be?
Somewhere, inside the wintry colonnade, Stands, like a churchdoor statue, God's Apostle, Good St. Peter, by the brazier, With his back turned to the trail. As scared and violent as flocks of birds of prey, The testimonies of the holy beggars Fly from the stones, and scatter in the windy shadows. The accusations of the holy judge Rise, in succession, dignified as rockets, Soar out of silence to their towering explosions And, with their meteors, raid the earth. And the gates of night fall shut with the clangor of arms. The crafty eyes of witnesses, set free to riot, Now shine as sharp as needles at the carved Apostle's mantle. Voices begin to rise, like water, in the colonnade; Fingers accuse him like a herd of cattle. Then the Apostle, white as marble, weak as tin Cries out upon the crowd: And, no less artificial than the radios of his voice, He flees into the freezing night. And all the constellations vanish out of heaven With a glassy cry; Cocks crow as sharp as steel in the terrible, clear east, And the gates of night fall shut with the thunder of Massbells.
Twice I have set my heart upon a sharing, Twice have imagined a real human home, Having forgotten how some fiercer caring Demands this naked solitude for loam. Now love pours out in light from every wound I know the kind of home this cannot be, And know more savagely what I have found  An open door into great mystery. I came here first for haven from despair And found a deeper root than passionate love, A wilder inscape and a safer lair Where the intrinsic being kept alive. Home is a granite rock and two sparse trees As light and shadow may inhabit these.
<> Shortly where his feet would be! Like a leaf at Michaelmas Swooning from the tree, Ere its hour the manly mind Trembles in a sure decrease, Nor the body now can find Any hold on peace. Take him, weak and overworn; Fold about his dying dream Boyhood, and the April morn, And the rolling stream: Weather on a sunny ridge, Showery weather, far from here; Under some deep-ivied bridge, Water rushing clear: Water quick to cross and part, (Golden light on silver sound), Weather that was next his heart All the world around! Soon upon his vision break These, in their remembered blue; He shall toil no more, but wake Young, in air he knew. He has done with roofs and men. Open, Time, and let him pass, Vague and innocent again, Into country grass.
Now that there's no time at all for her, there's less for you to remember leaving one early summer morning  sun on the sidewalk, the broken red bricks of Brooklyn, flowers brilliant in the yards, clinking unbuckled infantry boots ringing down the street, stirring dead-ends to voyages.... How thrilling it felt to be definitely going places, though not so sure what places, with no plan for early return, and the grey O of her staring disbelieving face at the porch window, who'd uproot her roses in a rage, throw out your stained microscope slides and prized stamps, weightless, leaping wildlife in brilliant tropics. They follow you soon after you leave into the garbage amid a buzzing both insect and human, where memory, heaped, steams, taking root in that place we begin by calling home.
the Heart is a clock around which clusters or which draws to itself all which is the same as itself in anything or anyone else the power of itself lies all about itself in a mathematic of feeling which we call love but who love itself is the container of all feelings otherwise than love as well as the Heart equally holds all else there is anywhere in Creation, when it is <>
Indifferent, in this torchlit dark, the restless noise ... Of sentries' sharp call, servants' tread, His son's voice, sinking; they cannot cross The room to him, nothing can exceed This space. And so had it been his life long. Not Cato had he made, but emptiness He had carved about him. The world was wrong, And only in this silence was there peace. Dimly he lifts his head and leaning forward Sees on the couch his body going away. Would it leave! that now at last his sword Gives Cato to himself. Stay, stay! Circumstance gropes everywhere, and flits Upon the world kindling its harsh whisper. See where the torch, guttering, impatiently sits With round arms folding darkness in its fire! A door is opened from their dark room to his. Had his friends heard? They would come near, and yet Are trammeled in the torch; their faces are blood-rose And crossed by shadows which, like whispers, net. He throws the petalled sword among the rose-heads, Disdainfully: even here the world was not Good. The whispers still, the roses have fled, With his own hands he turns himself inside out. This joyous space he feels is everywhere, And yet a point within his chest, and yet beyond These friends, beyond even the Caesar who hurries here; So great it is they cannot comprehend. And he alone knows that Cato is no more: For nothing now is not the space that Cato is. The torch is turning petals into rose, And long, long its tongues speak in his ear.
God is  a deep breath  a vote of confidence  a final stoic gesture One must be awake in Nirvana  or it's no good. Marx would not have said  religion  is the opium of the people Unless  he was desperate for something like opium. I lack D.H. Lawrence's  desperate belief  in his own vitality It killed him in the end too. Of all the religious temperaments I find Hart Crane the most sympathetic But do not intend to drown myself Even in drink. I'm still alone  after writing all this:  God hasn't spoken, alone and frightened  I will find some distraction. Je vais me raser  and put on a tie, turn  the corners of my mouth down  like Charles. Pride, devilish pride.
From muddy road to muddy lane I plodded through the falling rain; For miles and miles was nothing there But mist, and mud, and hedges bare. At length approaching I espied Two gypsy women side by side; They turned their faces broad and bold And brown and freshened by the cold, And stared at me in gypsy wise With shrewd, unfriendly, savage eyes. No word they said, no more dared I, And so we passed each other by, The only living things that met In all those miles of mist and wet.
The sudden appearance on roadbanks and along ditches, in weeds where nothing has been seen. Each stretching to get a look, returned the color of a salmon to the spot its parent marked for a day, risen from the dark by searching root deltas, the red climbing headwaters to burst the stem's thermometer. By trails and isolated meadows, speckled in the updrafts, each jumping clitoris of color. Meditating like Tibetan monks, tracking the sun. Tonight they roll up like cigars. As wind blows they rock the earth, make it pitch and run.
Peace in this green field. Bird any damn kind  They're all good!  Grass flowers the wind  What more do you want! Do you know something  I think it's beautiful! Makes you feel great Just to be alive! <> Piece of grass, huh? All warmed by the sun  Somebody pretty alongside you! Boy! that's it, you know  Maybe a glass of beer, huh? Your arm around her  <>
We are giggling about like girls in the Registry Office As I hold her death in my hand. Can I spell its name For the stunned typewriter, jolting its bones together, The circumlocution of walls, where the nineteen-forties Wobble their ghosts in blisters of cream and green, Sigh in these box-files and the scraps of drugget? Oh, what is hatched from these matches and despatches When the mountainous Registrar takes a flower from his drawer And swims like a seal through this wedding, where no impediment Stands between bridegroom, all his astonishing hair A wave of peroxide, tumbling to sharp lurex, And bride, whipped like cream, scenting the flowers Which twirl in the gloom and dazzle her nervous fingers? The whole room buckles to life, swells with napery: Handkerchiefs, tips of icebergs: a watch-chain's anchor Sliding deep into billows of navy. Voices roll Out of the broadest of acres; their brasses jingle Under the crisp rosettes pinned against flesh  We are flooded with Eastern light, and there in my hand I hold my mother a small, excited child In her plaits, her buttoned boots, her Edwardian trimmings. About us, the high parade of a Hiring Fair, The plash of dirt-straw under the wedged beasts, The huge teams dancing on their feathered feet, Dancing away with love, as I consign her Back to the files, back to the cradling dust, With all these blessings, warmed by the fires of those Who bless without knowing how, or whom, they bless.
In this season of salt leaves drop away revealing the structure of the trees. Good bones, as my father would say drawing the hair from my face. I'd pull impatiently away. Today we visit my father's grave. My mother housekeeps, with trowel among the stones, already at home here. Impatient, even at forty I hurry her home. We carry our childhoods in our arms.
<> Complete act: to die, flinging down The body. First passing The weapon carefully on To the brothers stepping up to take the weapon. In the great family stand the true brothers All necessary to the weapon. And the weapon, necessary. In the name of the weapon, no tears. In the name of all tears, no tears. Because of the killing Nazi, the horde, no tears. Bodies, no tears. Endless people, one by one, bodies, Cluster to take the weapon. Endless, vertical people, death-ready. We the declared brothers and sisters of the vast family send A message, short as war: <> <> <> <> <> In the name of all weeping and war, no tears. In the name of the howling wrongs of ages gone, no tears. In the name of twenty-four years, In the name of all years beyond these terrible years No tears.
Here where Love lies perish&eacute;d, Look not in upon the dead, Lest the shadowy curtains, shaken In my Heart's dark chamber, waken Ghosts, beneath whose garb of sorrow Whilom gladness bows his head: When you come at morn, to-morrow, Look not in upon the dead, Here where Love lies perish&eacute;d. Here where Love lies cold interred, Let no syllable be heard, Lest the hollow echoes, housing In my Soul's deep tomb, arousing Wake a voice of woe, once laughter Claimed and clothed in joy's own word: When you come at dusk, or after, Let no syllable be heard, Here where Love lies cold interred.
All who have toiled for Art, who've won or lost, Sat equal priests at her high Pentecost; Only the chrism and sacrament of flame, Anointing all, inspired not all the same. How often in our search for joy below Hoping for happiness we chance on woe. They who take courage from their own defeat Are victors too, no matter how much beat. How often hope's fair flower blooms richest where The soul was fertilized with black despair.  Those unrequited in their love who die  Have never drained life's chief illusion dry. Success allures us in the earth and skies: We seek to win her, but, too amorous, Mocking, she flees us. Haply, were we wise, We should not strive and she would come to us. Miranda-like, above the world she waves The wand of Prospero; and, beautiful, Ariel the airy, Caliban the dull,  Lightning and Steam, are her unwilling slaves. Wild son of Heav'n, with laughter and alarm, Now east, now west, now north, now south he goes, Bearing in one harsh hand dark death and storm, And in the other, sunshine and a rose. Yea, whom He loves the Lord God chasteneth With disappointments, so that this side death, Through suffering and failure, they know Hell To make them worthy in that Heaven to dwell Of Love's attainment, where they come to be Parts of its beauty and divinity. Summer met Sleep at sunset, Dreaming within the south,  Drugged with his soul's deep slumber, Red with her heart's hot drouth, These are the drowsy kisses She pressed upon his mouth. There is no Paradise like that which lies Deep in the heavens of her azure eyes: There is no Eden here on Earth that glows Like that which smiles rich in her mouth's red rose. To me not only does her soul suggest Palms and the peace of tropic shore and wood, But, oceaned far beyond the golden West, The Fortunate Islands of true Womanhood. The gladness of our Southern spring; the grace Of summer; and the dreaminess of fall Are parts of her sweet nature. Such a face Was Ruth's, methinks, divinely spiritual.
i am so glad and very merely my fourth will cure the laziest self of weary the hugest sea of shore so far your nearness reaches a lucky fifth of you turns people into eachs and cowards into grow our can'ts were born to happen our mosts have died in more our twentieth will open wide a wide open door we are so both and oneful night cannot be so sky sky cannot be so sunful i am through you so i
Once a month when I was twelve and my sister was ten our mother would drop us at The Philadelphia Academy of Music for the Saturday children's concerts. We'd sit in the enormous dark hall with the other children and I'd whisper to my sister that our mother was never coming back, that she'd abandoned us there, that she was driving to meet our father and take a plane to Europe. My sister called me a liar and her eyes filled with tears. The musicians had started on Mozart, but I was whispering about how we would feel when all the other children had gone and we were left standing in our navy winter coats on the grim Philadelphia street. I did not know then that I would grow to love the eighteenth century, that my sister would take her own life one winter day in Philadelphia, that childhood could be so final a thing.
'Way down de lane, behin' a row o' trees, Whaih all de summah croons de softes' breeze De ol' plantashun chu'ch am shinin' white. We da'kies lingah daih each Sund'y night, A-shoutin' praise to Gawd an' Jesus, too. We love de benches, made o' pine tree wood, We love de place whaih all de elduhs stood Each qua'tly meetin' day, a singin' himes An' tellin' us erbout de good ol' times W'en 'ligion was de only thing on earf. De preachuh's haid widout an inch o' turf Went waggin' 'way lak he's b'en set on fiah &ldquo;O Chillun, in de hebben libs de quiah Ob dose who shaired de trubbles ob de Lawd, Ob dose who found below de love ob Gawd. Come throw yo' se'f befo' de Mussy Scat, Come wash in Jesus blood yo' sinful feet. De Son oh Man's de Shephud ob de fol', De cripple lam' beneaf His cloak He hol'. In Hebben He hab filled yo' honey dish, Yo' comin' homewa'd's all dat He kin wish.&rdquo; He hug de bible, an' de sistahs shout A-puttin' all de debbils to de rout, &ldquo;Ol' Mount Moriah's lifted to de sky An' anguls on de wing go flittin' by. But w'en de deacon pass de wine an' braid Each Christ'un soul in reverence hang his haid. He am de chosen brothah ob de King, An' low an' mounful lak he's sho' to sing, &ldquo;Ah want to meet mah Saviour face to face.&rdquo; No, honey! all de worl' kin hol' no place Jes' lak de ol' plantashun chu'ch ob mine; It am de manshun ob de lowly folk, It am de spot whaih Gawd Himself hab spoke, It am de only place to shake de han', An' know dat you's as good as any man. Oh, dat's de place fu' me to live an' die, Bencaf de Mussy ob de Saviour's eye.
Music and silent death in league perfect and kill. Times they go wrong  a poor musician ages, Keats died young  but mostly, as if fearing to fatigue, Music gives up her favorite: once big and now delivered, no soul overlong is able to live. Tchaikovsky wrote a song of adequate gloom and died; the little jig at a big question was for Beethoven the last he had to say to us; and when he scratched these repetitions, Schumann came to the madhouse and death. I therefore watch my poems morbidly for one in which I finally shall recognize my name.
Would I could cast a sail on the water Where many a king has gone And many a king's daughter, And alight at the comely trees and the lawn, The playing upon pipes and the dancing, And learn that the best thing is To change my loves while dancing And pay but a kiss for a kiss. I would find by the edge of that water The collar-bone of a hare Worn thin by the lapping of water, And pierce it through with a gimlet and stare At the old bitter world where they marry in churches, And laugh over the untroubled water At all who marry in churches, Through the white thin bone of a hare.
What fools they are to believe the angels in this window are in ecstasy. They do not smile. Their eyes are rolled back in annoyance not in bliss, as my mother's eyes roll back when she finds us in the dirt with the cider  flies and juice blackening our faces and hands. When the sun comes up behind the angels then even in their dun robes they are beautiful, with their girlish hair and their mean lit faces, but they do not love the light. As I do not love it when I am made clean for the ladies who bring my family money. They stroke my face and smooth my hair. So sweet, they say, so good, but I am not sweet or good. I would take one of the possums we kill in the dump by the woods where the rats slide like dark boats into the dark stream and leave it on the heavy woman's porch just to think of her on her knees scrubbing and scrubbing at a stain that will never come out. And these angels that the women turn to are not good either. They are sick of Jesus, who never stops dying, hanging there white and large, his shadow blue as pitch, and blue the bruise on his chest, with spread petals, like the hydrangea blooms I tear from Mrs. Macht's bush and smash on the sidewalk. One night they will get out of here. One night when the weather is turning cold and a few candles burn, they will leave St. Blase standing under his canopy of glass lettuce and together, as in a wedding march, their pockets full of money from the boxes for the sick poor, they will walk down the aisle, imagining their own hymns, past the pews and the water fonts in which small things float, down the streets of our narrow town, while the bells ring and the birds fly up in the fields beyond and they will never come back.
Letters from an adventurous friend describe his visits to a naked stone-age tribe (all smeared with pig fat and for my tastes skinny) surviving in the forests of New Guinea. My friend explores what usually is missed by the explorer or the scientist. Enough, then, about carved shields and deadly spears, spiral inserts for the nose and ears, which make the tribesmen unglamorously fierce, foot-long penis sheathes they wear erect that anthropologists eagerly collect  things with which I've always been slightly bored and the secrets I want to hear about ignored. Now my friend confirms what one suspects: there's more to primitive life than artifacts, or head hunting, or eating human brains  though he assures me a lot of that remains. An appealing custom my friend has learned about from his stone-age friends first hand, no doubt, though the missionaries claim they've wiped this out: of the ancient traditions that endure, one holds that a boy can't properly mature unless he ingests an unspecified amount, but the more the better, of jungle gism spurting fresh and joyful from the fount  good for a growing boy's metabolism. What's more, the future of the tribes depended on keeping their boys kneeling or up-ended. So the men of this people wisely do their best, my friend writes, in the tribal interest to help each growing boy become a man, shooting a load as often as they can. Pig fat and all, the primitive world of sex, for those, like my friend, with the nerve to risk their necks.
We are old friends. She put my father to bed When he was little. Her stories are like lace The girls from the last century Wore against their thighs. There are dogs Who want to bite her throat. No use. There isn't a grain Of salt in it. The old lady Makes jams. For recipe she takes the palm From a newborn child. Take it as a medicine, A teaspoon at a time, and remember: You are a Saint turned over on a spit, You are a roach caught by the convicts. When you can't get out of bed She'll come visiting In her white bonnet Tapping her cane. With a tiny silver spoon She'll part the bark of your lips. She's a bee, you are her flower. That's all the explanation I find necessary.
Fair Lucille, my love is warm As the honey-bees that swarm In the June-time, happy time, In the June-time, summer's prime; Oh, my love is sweetly rare, Like the breeze of evening air, And a crystal touch from thee Brings fresh zephyrs from the sea. Love may come and love may go, Like the winter's drifting snow; Love may wither, shrink, and die, Like the maize in hot July; But my soul shall cherish one With the fervor of the sun; And, no matter what I feel, I shall always love Lucille.
Everywhere up and down the island Britain is mending her desert. Marvellous, we exclaim as we fly on it, tying the country in a parcel. London to Edinburgh, Birmingham to Cardiff, no time to examine the contents, thank you, but consider the bliss of sitting absolutely numbed to your nulled mind, music when you want it, while identical miles thunder under you, the same spot coming and going seventy, eighty times a minute, till you're there, wherever there is, ready to be someone in Liverpool, Leeds, Manchester, they're all the same to the road, which loves itself, which nonetheless here and there hands you trailing necklaces of fume in which to be one squeezed breather among rich and ragged, sprinter and staggerer, a status parade for Major Roadworks toiling in his red-trimmed triangle, then a regiment of wounded orange witches defending a shamelessly naked (rarely a stitch of work on her) captive free lane, while the inchlings inch on without bite or sup, at most a hard shoulder to creep on, while there, on all sides, lie your unwrapped destinations, lanes trickling off into childhood or anonymity, apple-scented villages asleep in their promise of being nowhere anyone would like to get to.
I will stand firm and say my say. I cannot be stupider than I am. If men do not make better sense God and I must go it alone. Yet tears well up, my voice is hoarse for my citizenly army in our shining helmets  vanishing in the mists of waking. What a beautiful idea the Reformation was! Mendelssohn's symphony we Jews naturally overestimated it. From phrase to phrase will I make do and choose the lovelier lilt of English ever over the truth.
Laid out for burial, a window's bones, like an old sheep in shallow snow. Lacework of stone where, once, the mason looked up, chafing his calloused palms with a grasshopper sound; where the glazier filled his mind with carmine, indigo; where the organist turned after the Agnus Dei, his hands in his lap; where the bishop glanced at the westering sun before Compline, easing his mind beyond his heavy purples to his evening draft of wine; where the bride, lifting her head, counted out the day; where the widow raised her eyes before nightfall, and the fist of earth.
Man can talk, but seldom Listen; for he hears Less the words that are spoken Than his own hopes and fears. Man can be taught perhaps only That which he almost knows For only in soil that is ready Grows the mind's obstinate rose. The right word at the wrong time Is wind-caught, blown away; And the most that the ages' sages' Wisdom and wit can say Is no more to the quickest pupil Than a midwife's delicate steady Fingers aiding and easing The thought half-born already. And argument is either A game light as a smile Where each side's equal cheating Observes the laws of guile, Or a bitter and bleeding duel Fought by the angry and blind (But tomorrow the loser will vanquish The victor's ghost in his mind). And all the comforter's eager Awkward speech is only A song-without-words whose tune will Lull, perhaps, the lonely.
I am the primrose way sometimes to the everlasting bonfire. I stride over you, through you, make the stage a T-square, take your applause and flowers as you touch me, shake yet not break that old decorum of watchers and watched. Call me a bridgehead, but the fighting's only mine, a bridge, but only players cross. Reach up and grab the demon's heels, the demon's blade could lop your heads like poppies  you want Killed By Art on your tombstone? Killed By Life's as bad for players. Yet I come swinging among you with my lights on, thronged with embroideries and paint and songs like a baby Ginza, while action rolls at right angles, peasants with chestnuts, kabuki stereo. Crane necks to me, cock ears for chestnuts cracking! To you, you're at a play, to me you're at and in a play, but only I see that, soaring through blue 3-D.
no man,if men are gods;but if gods must be men,the sometimes only man is this (most common,for each anguish is his grief; and,for his joy is more than joy,most rare) a fiend,if fiends speak truth;if angels burn by their own generous completely light, an angel;or(as various worlds he'll spurn rather than fail immeasurable fate) coward,clown,traitor,idiot,dreamer,beast  such was a poet and shall be and is  who'll solve the depths of horror to defend a sunbeam's architecture with his life: and carve immortal jungles of despair to hold a mountain's heartbeat in his hand
Blue dusk, with sweet moon light all around. As the blue cloud floats out over the dune The doleful choir of gnats still wails. Riverine currents of language swirl. A woman with wild hair enmeshed in dream Cries out into the archaic Saxon dusk  Clear long note on one pitch then spiraling up Just as my prince is about to take her. The submerged locker of his curious mind Is a thing I have long brooded upon. Love and death in the biological Secret lockers are unstored to air. The biological process of my dream So spooks me my heart's too small to hold The cold spray of desire in its light nets, And the woman at the manor window shakes The sheets out or is it her fine light hair?  Like a heavy dream, under a moon that Appears pitted and gibbous as it catches The quicksilver motive of my fictive dreams With tints of blue and gold; and by degrees Riverine currents of language swirl Through the blue cloud that floats out over the dune In bondage to death and oblivious Blue dusk, with sweet moon light all around.
From behind your tableau, bunsen burners, beakers, test tubes, with the periodic table for mise-en-sc&egrave;ne, you measured my light's luminescence and clarity. You missed the obvious truth. I meditated with reverent eyes on a man descending with open arms and flowing hair and robe from the boisterous beginnings of words. You commanded me to hold a snake. It was a black snake that wiggled like rubber. I prayed for God's voice to announce an intervention. I thought it would be a still voice like the one to Elijah and Samuel, or like the soothing annunciation. El Shaddai, God of my fathers, Eli, Eli, Lord of junior high school, rescue me from this snake that slinks and slithers, rescue me from Mrs. Moody's science class. I prayed before and after every class, to take away this snake that I feared. Eyes sometimes closed, sometimes open, my lips pursued the English of King James. I didn't understand the sex of it all.
We thought the grass would grow up quickly to hide the bodies. A brother sloped across his brother, the patched clay road slipping into our rainy season of red, our favorite color. When the pictures came we spoke of our love for guns, oiled and glistening in the rich blood of machines: bodies, boys and girls, clutching their private parts, oiled, now slightly pink, and never to be used.
The fly is not a nuisance to itself It is fat and beautiful to its own kind. Happily it hovers over the meat Taking off with bounces, buzzing with joy. In the heat the pavements blotched and stained Stink with the market offal, and the flies Cluster round the garbage and our legs. They will choke us if we do not kill them. Ugh! they are crowding over the food, inserting eggs Into the meat and smearing it with danger. To hurt humans is quite different, they do not Rot our substance; the bayonetted babies And other innocents thrown to the cobblestones Did not threaten the soldiers; but those men Had been told they did; taught disgust They swatted them like flies; the eggs would grow Into a horde to overrun their land. This sticky gritty wind infects the air The streets are full of vermin, and ugh! these flies.
All I planted came up, balsam and nasturtium and cosmos and the Marvel of Peru first the cotyledon then thickly the differentiated true leaves of the seedlings, and I transplanted them, carefully shaking out each one's hairfine rootlets from the earth, and they have thriven, well-watered in the new-turned earth; and grow apace now  but not one shows signs of a flower, not one. If August passes flowerless, and the frosts come, will I have learned to rejoice enough in the sober wonder of green healthy leaves?
The dry glasshouse is almost empty. A few pungent geraniums with lost markings lean in their pots. It is nothing but a cropping place for sun on cold Northumbrian July days. The little girl, fresh from suburbia, cannot believe in the peaches she finds here. They are green and furry as monkeys  she picks them and drops them. All the same they are matched to the word peach and must mean more than she sees. She will post them unripe, in a tiny envelope to her eight-year-old class-mates, and write carefully in the ruled-up spaces: &lsquo;Where we are the place is a palace.&rsquo;
It was necessary at the time that the sun go down veiled, orange, perfect  just a touch on the far hills, and that a half moon hang at a silver height. It was all necessary. Then where we sat we discussed the news about art, should it be free. Should our country support even what shocked some reluctant people who had to pay. By then in the dusk fireflies came out. The far hills, mounds of trees, moved nearer. A lawyer said, &ldquo;Let the artist paint but the state needn't pay at all.&rdquo; An artist said, &ldquo;But without a living what does freedom mean?&rdquo; And by then the stars had spread in a great arc. At our table where a candle burned our faces gathered on that little center of light, while the dark leaned in, large and cool and necessary.
I know I am but summer to your heart, And not the full four seasons of the year; And you must welcome from another part Such noble moods as are not mine, my dear. No gracious weight of golden fruits to sell Have I, nor any wise and wintry thing; And I have loved you all too long and well To carry still the high sweet breast of Spring. Wherefore I say: O love, as summer goes, I must be gone, steal forth with silent drums, That you may hail anew the bird and rose When I come back to you, as summer comes. Else will you seek, at some not distant time, Even your summer in another clime.
You took my empty dreams And filled them every one With tenderness and nobleness, April and the sun. The old empty dreams Where my thoughts would throng Are far too full of happiness To even hold a song. Oh, the empty dreams were dim And the empty dreams were wide, They were sweet and shadowy houses Where my thoughts could hide. But you took my dreams away And you made them all come true  My thoughts have no place now to play, And nothing now to do.
It was beginning winter, An in-between time, The landscape still partly brown: The bones of weeds kept swinging in the wind, Above the blue snow. It was beginning winter, The light moved slowly over the frozen field, Over the dry seed-crowns, The beautiful surviving bones Swinging in the wind. Light traveled over the wide field; Stayed. The weeds stopped swinging. The mind moved, not alone, Through the clear air, in the silence. Was it light? Was it light within? Was it light within light? Stillness becoming alive, Yet still? A lively understandable spirit Once entertained you. It will come again. Be still. Wait.
Driving back to the empty house after you left I could have been making my way back to a past where I didn't know you, or if we had met, we parted almost at once. History would have to be changed only a little  the fulcrum barely touched, so that everything slides to a slightly different position, and the border of light hits the bare wall instead of warming the plant that is trying to blossom. The house has the same wide windows, the same dark floors, but now it is merely a maze of rooms leading to no place particular. And my days will burn randomly, the way wax burns in a dish without a wick, my days will be like petals, losing the stem that forms them into a flower so there is only scent, only the vague promise of sensuality, and even that lasts only a moment.
We sucked clover into our noses, breathed it until the green flapped like the tissue we held to the electric fan, flipping over on our backs so the yellow light forced our eyes shut. We chewed the grass until it was milky and we felt like we had consumed luck, we had protected ourselves against the various legions of winged reptiles who slept on edges of dreams. The bell from the ice cream truck came tinkling through the weeping willow; we broke the lilies and low pine branches, running to the banana split, leaving the world in wreckage behind us. On the steps, we retrieved dropped cherries from the ants, wore the ice cream around our mouths, forgetting luck, forgetting the weakness of will.
Beautiful black women, fail, they act. Stop them, raining. They are so beautiful, we want them with us. Stop them, raining. Beautiful, stop raining, they fail. We fail them and their lips stick out perpetually, at our weakness. Raining. Stop them. Black queens, Ruby Dee weeps at the window, raining, being lost in her life, being what we all will be, sentimental bitter frustrated deprived of her fullest light. Beautiful black women, it is still raining in this terrible land. We need you. We flex our muscles, turn to stare at our tormentor, we need you. Raining. We need you, reigning, black queen. This/ terrible black ladies wander, Ruby Dee weeps, the window, raining, she calls, and her voice is left to hurt us slowly. It hangs against the same wet glass, her sadness and age, and the trip, and the lost heat, and the grey cold buildings of our entrapment. Ladies. Women. We need you. We are still trapped and weak, but we build and grow heavy with our knowledge. Women. Come to us. Help us get back what was always ours. Help us. women. Where are you, women, where, and who, and where, and who, and will you help us, will you open your bodysouls, will you lift me up mother, will you let me help you, daughter, wife/lover, will you The penalty is death, for death to walk up cold paths with fake light splintering water, patchy thighs rubbed together under the spoils of (they think) the universe. All except spirit, up the concrete under glass, they come in and look at other beings like them, parading, sleeping, deathly colorless tin cans, ashes in peach juice, lipstick cigars jammed in their eggs. Brecht speaks and they cannot hear. Their own species accuses, and the blue veins bulge in their ankles, the jewelry cold cancer identifying these diseased creatures, slobbering over humanity. A portrait of them while they rule the world. For my Brothers dead living and yet unborn. This year 1966, in their measure, almost two thousand years since they hung this ol' jew, and made Sidney Poitier carry his cross. (The landscape from that hill was marvelous, you could get papaya juice and knishes, nudist movies and cheap flashy clothes.) In this year, when they are still dealing death. Some sleep holding their breath in the urine air. Some march on roofs shitting on everything. Some hold hands with beautiful niggers, rubbing their rings into the niggers chests, the jews send their girls, a hundred of their best, each year into the black world, to perform the ritual. The glazed eyes of the victim, hears the drums, war drums, and thinks about museums, or interesting queers, or eating pussy. The drums go on, the wind batters his head, these hundred sailing vampires settle their ears to the black man's balls their radio tongues to his thigh. The penalty is death, for death. You walk with them hypnotized niggers. You crawl up in the dark stomach of a monster, and the blood feels good running in your mouth. You smile. You sit and say intelligence to animals. You hold hands with dumb material, and lose all light
Plunge beneath the ledge of coral Where the silt of sunlight drifts Like dust that settles toward a floor  As slow as that: feel the lifting Surge that rustles white above But here is only movement deep As breathing: watch the reef fish hover Dancing in their silver sleep Around their stone, enchanted tree: Stoop through the wavering cave of blue: Look down, look down until you see, Far, far beneath in the translucent Lightlessness, the huge, the fabulous Fish of fishes in his profound gulf: Grip your stickled spear to stab And sink below the shadowy shelf  But fear that weed, as though alive, That lifts and follows with the wave: The Moray lurks for all who dive Too deep within the coral cave. Once tooth of his has touched the bone Men turn among those stones to stone.
I know there is a living God,  Who reigns supreme on high; Who shaped each path where mortals trod,  And paints the azure sky. The lilies of the furtile fields,  Which glorifies the land, With raiments bright, sweet odor yields  Beneath His great command. His powerful hand illumes the sun,  With glittering rays of light; He fixed the countless stars, each one,  To twinkle through the night. In gorgeous splendor pure and bright,  He decorate the trees; He shapes the wind, obscure from sight,  And fills the mighty seas. He holds the life of mortal man,  Through days of bliss and pain; And fits us with an inner soul,  That we might live again. He plants the mighty forest trees,  Which crowns the wood-land hill; By His command the waters flow,  Through many a thousand rill. The sparrow finds her simple wants,  The needy finds their bread; Earth's humblest creatures ne'er should daunt.   He sees that all are fed. I know there is a living God!  Or whence these wonders come; The birth of time, the fleeting breath,  The orbs that fill yon dome? E'en the benighted heathen man,  Has found a sacred shrine; And seeing wonders of God's hand,  Seeks for a life divine.
His eyes were too far from the page too long, so he can't see much. He says the river is like that, in his sleep he says the river doesn't see much either, it just flows on, and on. They were so unhappy their silence was not even abject anymore, nor was their silence anger. it had gone so far  like a very long snowstorm  it had lost any edge it had. She kept a secret journal of dreams, he was a writer so he simply kept secrets, every word could have been a secret, who knows ... if she had shared hers or he his or both they might have made it. Life is like silence  can suddenly make way all the way around. The snow fell loudly on the river like lamps falling she dreamt of asking the wedding band to play &ldquo;Bye Bye Blackbird&rdquo;  this was less a dream than an abject moment when she married him  but now the dream turned, although someday this too could be &ldquo;real&rdquo; and she was standing in an idea, a train was departing, her journal was the color of confidence as she walked away all by herself from her blackbirds and the terrible silence which was his. There is a couple very happy indeed whatever that means and they have a silence also. Snow is falling. The road is deep with snow.
Like the magnificent stationary animal it is, its pelage tipped with color, our cutleaf maple has already in two months become companionable as it begins to turn, a flush of rose over the filigree of green. No doubt now, this is autumn, the equinox is past. Night is sable, silky, and the gray sky of daytime opal, my favorite season and, you have told me, yours. We fell in love in winter, in spring we planted, in summer we made our home, our family, keeping the grand tradition, which may thus be augmented minutely in nature's way. What are we reaping? Someday we'll know. Now see the silvery rain that falls in the blush of the maple leaves like grain.
Down in the Southland once I found a vale  Wherein I thought the fairy muses dreamed.  Thither so oft I went that soon it seemed My soul, when lonely, sought that quiet dale. So I would go; and, when all else would fail,  Peace met me there, with gentle eyes that streamed  In sympathy; and Hope came; and I deemed That, sheltered safe from every stormy gale,  Dreaming sweet dreams, 'twere sweet to rest me there  Forevermore. And, haply, some sweet bard Might see my grave, and sing, while cooed the dove,  And breathed the balm of 'fumed air and sward, Of life and death, and mystery, and love;  And all the tender hopes that waft us up above.
No one will ever understand that evening Who has not lain the night with a changeable lover, Changeable as that last evening. No one who has not ever seen that color Change and travel the hills, the irrelevant bells Ringing the changes, And seen the green enter the evening sky, Reluctant yellow come and the cathedral Unfold in rose  And stood under that rose of stone, remembering rose Spattered in feasts of rockets, interrupted By the black downdrawn line Of the down-turning wheel of carnival will ever know The evening color filtered through cinnamon And how the birds came down Through the bars of yellow and the bars of green Into the brandy dusk and the leaves of night, A touch, a shadow of touch, when breasts Lift their little branches, and showers and flares of fire Rise in the blood, in spite of the word of war, In spite of evening coming down like a lover, Like the birds falling among the trees, like music As the trees close, and the cathedral closes. No one will know who in a stranger land Has never stood while night came down In shadows of roses, a cloud of tree-drawn birds, And said, &ldquo;I must go home.&rdquo;
Once more I've begun the treatise; once more I shall place my thoughts at the foci of wisdom moving in that inner wheel, hoping like Ezekiel that the patterns of nature the laws shall let my orbit stand: I'm speaking about time and continents. I'm speaking about what it exacted, borne, and somehow carried. I'm speaking about the world of our fathers: the song and the past song: And much has been asked of song. Don't doubt it. Like love, like jazz, like the endless visions which give us a life, song is an awesome thing. We must not betray it. there is grief; there is grief enough So I think of Tanner's boy, kneeling at his grandfather's knee, kneeling at the wide mouth of guitar, the strongest source: Free, intimate with time, burdened and lightened, finally carried in a sea, a motion, a music: nothing may turn him around. Listen: the music is ours; it will not abandon us.
But I'm a summer gardener: though I ruthlessly swat the flies in my house, in my field I will not shoot the chucks but let them eat. To Alvin, acres that he farms are home he has the joy of hunting with a flushed face and a loud gun. My hunting is to notice my loud gun is to say, and so I immortalize details of this world. Some I have made into fur hats, others are stuffed and stare from the walls.
The years that did not count Civilians in the towns Remained at the same age as in Nineteen-Thirty-Nine, Saying last year, meaning the last of peace; Yet eyes began to pucker, mouth to crease, The hiatus was too packed with fears and frowns, The would-be absent heart came forth a magnetic mine. As if the weekly food queue were to stretch, Absorb all future Europe. Or as if The sleepers in the Tube had come from Goya's Spain Or Thucydides' Corcyra a long way to fetch People to prove that civilization is vain, Wrapped in old quilts; no wonder they wake stiff. Yes, we wake stiff and older; especially when The schoolboys of the Thirties reappear, Fledged in the void, indubitably men, Having kept vigil on the Unholy Mount And found some dark and tentative things made clear, Some clear made dark, in the years that did not count.
It makes so little difference, at so much more Than seventy, where one looks, one has been there before. Wood-smoke rises through trees, is caught in an upper flow Of air and whirled away. But it has been often so. The trees have a look as if they bore sad names And kept saying over and over one same, same thing, In a kind of uproar, because an opposite, a contradiction, Has enraged them and made them want to talk it down. What opposite? Could it be that yellow patch, the side Of a house, that makes one think the house is laughing; Or these escent issant pre-personae: first fly, A comic infanta among the tragic drapings, Babyishness of forsythia, a snatch of belief, The spook and makings of the nude magnolia? ... Wanderer, this is the pre-history of February. The life of the poem in the mind has not yet begun. You were not born yet when the trees were crystal Nor are you now, in this wakefulness inside a sleep.
He was struck with awe at the sight of them: a shoal lifting above the water's surface; each head trained to his voice's timbre, each spine anchored for the moment's purpose. For the sea-dark flock, he fixed his words, he the shepherd above them. In the distance the itinerant waves obeyed by ritual motion. Words flew from him  How he had rehearsed such a miracle! Before the silver of their scales, and the heads in seeming infinite number, he was great and gathered them in his hunger. Yet, once lulled, how quiet this multitude  that like quarter notes broke the water's line as if hovering above the stillness where the lowest staff separates music from endless silence. Though his words had touched their hearing and their heads above the water were tamed he was pinned by his eye in water. Arms outstretched, his figure remained rooted, and would never master what, in one movement turning round, they did, descending guiltless into water, which glimmered darkly as they fanned out, flying downward.
<> A spotlight's moon of gold; into it came A spirit clothed in stars and dark blue flame, That deeper glowed than night had ever dared; The moon fares in the sky, but here there fared A bit of sky that sang within the moon, Of hearts that break in spring and know not June, Or hearts that ache with tenderness unshared,  Sang till her own heart, broken, winged with song, Floated above dark heads and to them told  These silent lives of tragedy and wrong  How lips may quiver though the sky be blue, How eyes may blur with tears though moons be gold, How hearts among the stars are broken, too!
It soothes the savage doubts. One Bach outweighs ten Belsens. If 200,000 people Were remaindered at Hiroshima, the sales of So-and-So's New novel reached a higher figure in as short a time. So, imperishable paintings reappeared: Texts were reprinted: Public buildings reconstructed: Human beings reproduced. After the Newer Apocalypse, very few members Were still in possession of their instruments (Very few were still in possession of their members), And their suits were chiefly indecent. Yet, while the town still reeked of smoke etc., The Philharmonic Trio bestowed etc. A civilization vindicated, A race with three legs still to stand on! True, the violin was shortly silenced by leukaemia, And the pianoforte crumbled softly into dust. But the flute was left. And one is enough. All, in a sense, goes on. All is in order. And the ten-tongued mammoth larks, The forty-foot crickets and the elephantine frogs Decided that the little chap was harmless, At least he made no noise, on the banks of whatever river it used to be. One day, a reed-warbler stepped on him by accident. However, all, in a sense, goes on. Still the everlasting and imperishable joy Which music never fails to give is being given.
I do my best to smile at spring, small flowers for consolation and lament, a light wind on the lips in lieu of love. The gods are demanding happiness, for whom pain is merely pleasure brought to its pitch. My doubt is a shadow across their calm empty eyes that promise white porticoes and then depart. I have my restless walks under tumbling petals eager for the pavement: their ripeness is a fault in me, this longing to do without. The buds left behind on the light branches do without that slight blossoming, now free to die in their turn, first bursting into their harsh green maturity.
You must always be alone. But don't beg a soupscrap of charity or birdcrumb of tolerance. Shift for yourself. As furniture heaves off your life you'll love your deliverance. Until loneliness slips in, scrawny and hungry, Miss Loneliness, over the barrenness, bribing with company. Restlessness, one of her attendants. And the drunk twins, of course, Memory and Remorse. Refuse them. Stay faithful to Silence, just Silence, sliding between that breath and now this breath, severing the tick from the tock on the alarm clock, measuring the absence of else. And the presence, the privilege.
<> And the dear, cool fingers of home wind fast about my own, While broken words of love are sounding at my shoulder Saying You were away, and everything was lone.  The hills you knew and meadowland and house were empty; The cherries blossomed and the petals fell unseen, The dark fruit rounded, ripened and was gathered, And oh how empty was the place where you had been! Sometimes the dogs would come, whining softly for you, Asking for a romp across the windy fields once more, Wondering what kept you so, worried and bewildered, Waiting for your eager step, your whistle at the door . Yes, I am home again, the chimney smoke is rising Straight against the sunset, and lo! a window gleams, But there's no voice at my shoulder, no clasp of dear cool fingers, Only the quiet frost and the dim-eyed sorrow of dreams.
Rabbits breed, flies breed, said the virgin lady; But I Cannot find my fulness where they rise, My many children, their burning mouths and eyes, Their bodies that have other fathers made. The wife gone sterile in her weeping said Flies breed, rabbits breed; Faith of our time falls hissing on the sand, Hard sand, is the hand of man set against hope? My bed Whispers to me all year my love my hope my land. Rabbits breed, flies breed, cried the infinite hearts of all the unborn, In shady leafy places, underseas and in dim rooms, in the prodigal dark, all things are made again, but here Among the new dreams and new nightmares, who listens, who believes? They give their stone demand To the born, to the seed and seeking. While change emerges like another power from power, no longer the old good and evil, but a blessing that fares in the world, among the cities torn down Crying awake, among the clouds who move calling do. The mouth saying nothing. The air saying live and die. The womb saying welcome, the sun saying Dare.
Always something new, and now these signs peremptory green and threatening red &ldquo;Walk&rdquo; &ldquo;Don't Walk&rdquo; &ldquo;Walk&rdquo; &ldquo;Don't Walk&rdquo; jump up and down like soldiers on the street City Hall thought it up. But people circumspectly watch the traffic, drop a modest eye around the corner, and flit through a disappearing crevice. &ldquo;Circumspect&rdquo; like crossing Ninth Avenue &ldquo;Modest&rdquo; like asking for a raise &ldquo;Nimble&rdquo; like disregarding bad advice we walk, if merry were, our merry way. However, we have unhappy faces (though human compared with the Americans), for my native city has become worn and dirty like an old shoe that doesn't even fit.
There is this long discussion of tragedy and the end is in sight: what will I do, I will be good at that sea, another weight, another sea. As horrible as the stars are they are outrageous, in their little fledgling lights in their sea, the sea of night and the sea of the rages, the wages which are not yours or mine or any hill belonging to anyone under the same raging night. But the time, the time when the weight drops from the light, kisses the hill with the fact of its light across same seas of night: the wages of tragedy, the pathetic ego hanging in the light, the sea there, the hill, all the time turned back by the little gas in the little preposterous lamp of the ego.
Right to my backyard clothes-line, tablecloths Are tethered like gigantic, yellow moths. Vermilion dresses, wavering in the air, Are brilliant butterflies that anchor there. Pajamas, zebra-striped, and blouses red,  Great insects try to flutter wings and spread. Brown stockings, lifted by the wind, like lured, Tugging long dragonflies, are safely moored. Napkins of orange and of blue, like wine, Flourish exotic faunas on the line. And shirts of grey and emerald flap and flag: Bizarre-winged creatures come from Brobdingnag. I rub my eyes. I wonder which is true: If this is really family wash I view? Or on my line, miraculously clings What wondrous, colored parliament of wings?
In all these rotten shops, in all this broken furniture and wrinkled ties and baseball trophies and coffee pots I have never seen a postwar Philco with the automatic eye nor heard Ravel's &ldquo;Bolero&rdquo; the way I did in 1945 in that tiny living room on Beechwood Boulevard, nor danced as I did then, my knives all flashing, my hair all streaming, my mother red with laughter, my father cupping his left hand under his armpit, doing the dance of old Ukraine, the sound of his skin half drum, half fart, the world at last a meadow, the three of us whirling and singing, the three of us screaming and falling, as if we were dying, as if we could never stop in 1945  in Pittsburgh, beautiful filthy Pittsburgh, home of the evil Mellons, 5,000 miles away from the other dancing in Poland and Germany  oh God of mercy, oh wild God
Everything I want to say is in that name for these cloves of garlic they shine like pearls still warm from a woman's neck. My fingernail nudges and nicks the smell open, a round smell  that spirals up. Are you hungry? Does it burn through your ears? Did you know some cloves were planted near the coral-coloured roses to provoke the petals into giving stronger perfume ... Everything is in that name  for garlic: Roses and smells  and the art of naming ... What's in a name? that which we call a rose, By any other name would smell as sweet ... But that which we call garlic smells sweeter, more vulnerable, even delicate if we call it  The roses on the table, the garlic in the salad and the salt teases our ritual tasting to last longer. You who dined with us tonight, this garlic will sing to your heart to your slippery muscles will keep your nipples and your legs from sleeping. Fragrant blood full of garlic  yes, they noted it reeked under the microscope. His fingers tired after peeling and crushing the stinking rose, the sticky cloves  Still, in the middle of the night his fingernail nudges and nicks her very own smell  her prism open
<> When there was the tribe to lean upon, all could be strong upon their own. Some man (or woman) sharpened a stone, some woman (or man) shaped a spear and flung it sharp against the fear of the shapeless blunt unknown when in the most ancient of days the sexes were one.  A woman's world more than a man's, if you will, for we were the kin and claim of life; yet all life shared alike. The work was hard and the ground frozen hard, and the man-hunter home with the stiffened kill; huddled and held together for heat: our boundaries like clipped winter days dark and harsh and night coming stiffly on. So we stayed, mate by mate, cold flesh by cold bone within the stone cave. Our time was prime, our place was clear. Spade for the soil, toil for the fruit. All spun the threads of the mutual plot, all took our luck direct from the pot.  Whether man or woman, it mattered not who stirred and simmered the common pot, when served and deserved the self-same lot. And although there was much we went without; no loss or gain was singled out. We wore no pockets, had nothing to hide: no doubts and no maybes to tuck inside. Then price-tags were put on. A larger size for his disguise, a smaller leaf to figure her brief.
From a hill we watched the brown floodwater Cross the immense snow plain, A white sheet of paper slowly burning  The flashboard of the dam burst Taking the mortar-lip with it that morning. The village was in no danger. Under a limestone Wall, in ice, we found The red berries of Solomon's seal. We watched Three frantic deer climb out of the ravine. The game warden with his thermos of brandy Was squatting down under the spruce trees. The sun setting as we climbed into the car. The wallpaper in our room at the Inn Had whorled faces made by a leaky radiator That shook the ceiling. Light from the window Crossed your breasts, a nipple Pink and erect through the loose cable-stitch Of the black sweater. At the light switch You stopped And looked for the first time Into the old photograph, an inscription In white ink. It was the old garnet mine At Morse Mountain: a blind pit pony climbing Out of the earth, the dirty splint on its leg Wrapped night-eye to cannon bone, pan-candles At his withers; And then, a big grizzled man In just long johns holding the blur Of a frightened field mouse by the tail ... I asked, &ldquo;What is it?&rdquo; Beginning To undress in the dark, Your clothes falling over the chair, you stepped Into what light there was in the room, light That had come from the moon, and said, &ldquo;There's a giant in that photograph, cats at his feet, One gold and one black, the gold cat Is playing with a yellow stub of wax, the giant Has taken just the tail of a mouse Out of the mouth of the black cat he dangled It before him for the photograph. There's a pony Who caught a pick-axe in the leg. It's the old talc mine On Morse Mountain. I could never live like that ... I'd sooner eat the sleep of Solomon's seal.&rdquo;
The sea flat out, the light far out, sky red, the blobs of dark clouds seem closer, beyond the far lateral of extended sea. Shimmer of reflected sand tones, the flat ripples as the water moves back an oscil- lation, endlessly in- stinct movement leaves a ribbing after itself it then returns to. Bird flicker, light sharp, flat the green hills of the two islands make a familiar measure, momently seen. The air is thick and wet and comfortably encloses with the sea's sounds. Sleep it washes away.
<> And twirls about the Sun, Both with and withershins At once, a dual run Anomalously one; Its speed is such it gains Upon itself: outsped, Outdistanced, it remains At every point ahead, No less at all points led, At none with either strains Or lapses in the rush Of its almighty vanes To mar the poise or hush; Comparing it for speed: Lightning is a snail That pauses on its trail From bank to underbrush, Mindful of its need, With dawn astir, to feed Before the morning thrush; Comparing it for poise: The tops we spun to sleep, Seemingly so deep Stockstill, when we were boys, No more than stumbled round, Boxwoods though they were, The best we ever wound Or whipped of all such toys; Comparing it for sound: The wisp of gossamer Caught in a squirrel's fur, Groans like a ship aground; Shadow makes more noise.
Sister Jean Therese sold pagan babies at five dollars a copy. I bought four. And named them after saints and archangels and waited for their letters. I suppose if I haven't heard by now I never will. Still, who's to know? Stranger things have happened. Maybe they'll be on the next boat over. The idea was to save their bodies and then to claim their souls for Jesus Christ. The old  routine. The loaves and fishes sleight of hand that feeds the hungry, clothes the bare naked, relieves them of their dear idolatries  their fierce gods everywhere, gods in everything.
O my darling troubles heaven With her loveliness She is made of such cloth That the angels cry to see her Little gods dwell where she moves And their hands open golden boxes For me to lie in She is built of lilies and candy doves And the youngest star wakens in her hair She calls me with the music of silver bells And at night we step into other worlds Like birds flying through the red and yellow air Of childhood O she touches me with the tips of wonder And the angels cuddle like sleepy kittens At our side
Everything inside this room is mine. And everyone inside it has to stay. It's where I keep my horses and my men, cooled on summer days by giant fans whose steady rhythm calms the anxious mind. Nor do I want torpor, or docility. From the very moment I arrive I like to have each person's full attention, until a silence is attained so deep some of you will hear the Voice of Bobo, when, after having queues of tiresome people teasing her by blowing down her ear, she suddenly can't bear it any longer and starts to bark, as only Bobo can. Those who hear that precious Voice go forward to other, smaller rooms, for the Advanced. Everybody else must stay on here  here between the land and the sea where long ago I built this secret palace balanced on the cliff among the predators to take advantage of the sweeping views.
I run up the stairs too fast every morning and panting for mail, I stagger inside and there she sits wagging a negative finger. Her frown is etched in and her mouth is sour. <> This is Odysseus. I've come a long way. I've beaten a giant, real mean with one eye. Even the sea. I've defeated the water. But now I'm home, pooped. Where's Penelope? <> My name is Joseph and this, my wife Mary. we've had a long journey and Mary is heavy. The facts are odd. The child could be holy and I wonder, have you a room in your inn? <> I'm Genghis Khan and this is my army. We've conquered your land. Now we want women. Bring them today at high noon to the square. After we've had them, we'll get out of here. <> I'm Michelangelo, here to make statues. I've lugged this damn marble all the way from the Alps. I'll need a large scaffold and plenty of ropes, a chisel, a mallet and oodles of wine. <> Oh, heroes of time, you're never a hero until you've endured ten days with no mail. Slaughter the stars and come home in splendor. She'll always be there at the end of the trail. <>
In this rude world Memory pertains In bald things, Of promises skipped over, violence Or accidents of kissing. Read within the deep patina Of the old stump Of a chainsawed black walnut Its circular History from sex to ruin; Look where Cracked and spattered chunks Of cold quartz Stuck in mud Glitter up from a dull hill. Downhill, the wrecked car: A punched-in windshield Sags whole, An afterimage of collision, Brilliant with sky.
Once in the late Sixties they held me down in a hammerlock, elbows pinned, twisted behind me. One man, his knee on my back, asked his friend, &ldquo;Should I smash him or what?&rdquo; All this because I had said, inside in the warmth, that I preferred we get out of Vietnam. On that sidewalk outside the fine restaurant I learned to let go all opinion, at least till they freed my arms, let me walk defeated away, trembling, while they watched, reconsidered, letting me live. Against that cold black iron of the grating, that sidewalk steam mingled with my breath, I considered letting my body go. And I got up charged with the hate they are so proud of, still hating their loves, still loving their hates.
A peasantry on its knees, not praying, labouring for the bread that perishes. And this one came preaching the gospel of folly that man shall not live by bread only. So they left the fields to assist at the delivery of the machine from time's side. Of whom does the scarecrow remind arms wide as though pierced by the rain's nails, while the motorist goes by insolently wagging his speedometer's finger?
Now when the yellow corn falls freely from the husks, a hard, jewelled dust, the land clots our fingernails, mud clothes each hoof, and the moon, a flood of silver swords, shakes its mane down to a silk of ice upon every breastbone. Unbelieving, the young man claps his woman close, weaves with a nail's thrust through the tree's heart, a house to hold the heavy night aloft; a crown-like crust comes sifting at the shuddering slats, comes from the mountains' height along each riverbank where fish hold still near stones. It is the shaking season among the seeds. Surprised, he will wake with husks stealing the gold of sun from her hair; lovingly he will press the pale from her cheeks until she glows warm and lost in the dawn.
intersections of forms areal the world's parts move a magical shape inoutof all so cloudy is change fog is gone leaving the ground rain drops the sun penetrates certain things though some slide off
Of those we tried to know whom have we known? For like a seed pearl lost upon the beach Where down through tinier stones our fingers reach To grains that, wet, glow like that one, our own. .. Yet ah! they dry .. lose lustre! .. so lose tone Those lucent souls we welcome, till from each We, whom perseverance and patience teach, Must hide a disillusioned heart and groan. Yet pain, as in the shell reclosed seed pearl May gather nacre ... build foiled worth twice over; Even mean returns ennoble the hurt lover; Round missed and mourned, divined and fathomed furl, Till apprehended the apprehender dare Sublime from loss values that never were. How rarely thus rich memories are shown! Even leaden griefs from their bruised womb derive, Godlike, new health till they spring-tinted thrive, So phantasms to the portraying hand atone, Though they dissolved, with spore the soul was sown .. That magic glass where images revive Will nourish roots in her dun pool alive Till spirit-lily on her face have blown. O Pearl, pangs, griefs re-integrate as tints, Not here, not there, not weighed, not bored, not threaded On matrix mother-of-pearl no longer bedded, But, rainbow fabric of a myriad hints, Breathed from your book, arched over dead distress, Vision absorbs experience and can bless!
The hairs of my beard are red and black mingled, With white now frequent in the red and black. My finger-nails, see here, are ill-assorted; My hands are not a pair, nor are my brows; My nose is crooked as my smile. &lsquo;How?&rsquo; says the Satyr. &lsquo;Dare I trust a monster Who cannot match his left hand with his right, Who wears three several colours in his beard?&rsquo; Satyr, the question is well asked. Nevertheless I am as trustworthy As any shepherd in this wide valley. I touch the doubtful with the left hand first, Then with the right, under right brow and left Peer at it doubtfully. I am red-bearded wild, white-bearded mild, Black-bearded merry. And what the other shepherds know but singly And easily at the first sight or touch (Who follow a straight nose and who smile even) I know with labour and most amply: I know each possible lie and bias That crookedness can cozen out of straightness. Satyr, you need not shrink.
She was worried he couldn't be happy just loafing about by the river, like she liked doing. Plans, and plans about plans, and sex, was  He wore a floppy hat. She felt so lonely! Another thing, she couldn't spell. <> She cooked him cockles in a thick orange sauce, and bought him a suitcase  &lsquo;for the Great Man&rsquo;. They sat on a rocky mountain dressed in leather. Sardines and beer. <> Their children were his books. She understood that. <> lecture notes. &lsquo;The blissfully well-run nursing-home&rsquo; is now public knowledge  her little lump, like longing, prized from her oesophagus; her crawling from the hut on her knees. A tortoise-shell comb, embroidery, The Crack. A lovely moth. &lsquo;The nurse is a crashing bore&rsquo; ... poking about among her mysteries. <>
Here in turn succeed and rule Carter, smith, and village fool, Then again the place is known As tavern, shop, and Sunday-school; Now somehow it's come to me To light the fire and hold the key, Here in Heaven to reign alone. All the walls are white with lime, Big blue periwinkles climb And kiss the crumbling window-sill; Snug inside I sit and rhyme, Planning poem, book, or fable, At my darling beech-wood table Fresh with bluebells from the hill. Through the window I can see Rooks above the cherry-tree, Sparrows in the violet bed, Bramble-bush and bumble-bee, And old red bracken smoulders still Among boulders on the hill, Far too bright to seem quite dead. But old Death, who can't forget, Waits his time and watches yet, Waits and watches by the door. Look, he's got a great new net, And when my fighting starts afresh Stouter cord and smaller mesh Won't be cheated as before. Nor can kindliness of Spring, Flowers that smile nor birds that sing, Bumble-bee nor butterfly, Nor grassy hill nor anything Of magic keep me safe to rhyme In this Heaven beyond my time. No! for Death is waiting by.
I've heard yogis talk of a divine emptiness, the body free of its base desires, some coiled and luminous god in all of us waiting to be discovered ... and always I've pivoted, followed Blake's road of excess to the same source and know how it feels to achieve nothing, the nothing that exists after accomplishment. And I've known the emptiness of nothing to say, no reason to move, those mornings I've built a little cocoon with the bedcovers and lived in it, almost happily, because what fools the body more than warmth? And more than once I've shared an emptiness with someone and learned how generous I can be here, take this, take this ...
If vision can dilate, my noble lord, Farther than porticos, Italian cells, Newtonian gardens, Haydn, and cuisine, Tell us, most serious of all our poets, Why is the clock so low? I see the tender gradient of your will; Virginia is the Florence of your soul, Yes, ours. The architecture of your hands Quiets ambition and revives our skill And buys our faithlessness. So temperate, so remote, so sure of phrase, Your music sweeps a continent, a sphere, Fashions a modern language for a war And by its cadence makes responsible Our million names to you. When you were old the god of government Seemed to recede a pace, and you were glad. You watched the masons through your telescope Finish your school of freedom. Death itself Stood thoughtful at your bed. And now the surfaces of mind are rubbed Our essence starts like serum from our eyes. How can you not assume the deities That move behind the bloodshot look and lean Like saints and Salem devils?
O Osiris of the Overworld Occupant of Highest Office O Commander-in-Chief Of all Our Armed Forces O Olympian Appointer Of Supreme Justice O Orchestrator Of Anti-Communist Orgasm O Outstanding Opportunist O Orthopedist of Democratic Deformities O Optimum Operator O Outright Nixon's the One
My guide was an urchin whom I chose in preference to some scowling bandits who tried to trip him as we passed but how had he learnt the dynasties and rituals of the ancient and the recent troglodytes who'd scored the bleached heights with a comb of cells? With shards of pottery and pomegranate seeds he explained how every year Persephone has found her way down to the underworld guided by the warbling of some nightbird then retraced her steps by letting that coil unwind which her descent had wound so tight inside her. We entered dark interiors through white sockets where the light would strain to turn a corner but faint within a footstep of the doorstep. At last we mounted the cablecar that fell through the hanging gardens of the chasm: bits of where we'd lived were scattered on lovely terraces and families huddled on creaking boughs under polythene. Was that my cousin hanging by her heels? The sky skipped like chips of phosphorus in a bowl of water and oil seeped through cracked earth to the watertable. From where the monks had once drawn water far down there on the valley's floor I heard the black sounds flowing, slowly at first  a battered goatskin, the string on a gourd ... then all we had to do (it seemed so easy) was follow that music to its source.
New Year's Eve.  Under a sky as high as this we are cut-glass, space-lattices  for broken narratives, like mountain cities left behind  through the mind's eye, revisited. Pavement weeds are faint with light.  Birds raucous in the bushes. Perspectives in the High Street  lowered, lengthened, acquire the clarity of paintings. Glass  animals of childhood, horses seals balancing on crystal globes  are as we are to the sky whose distance finds no measure  between cloud and cloud, this year and the next, being the same high blue  we saw when we were small and our menagerie of bright revolves  already broken narratives. Against the unbroken blue, nothing  is not nervous, alive with light: stream, swans, bicycles, elude our need  to follow one train of thought of wing or water, adjacent roofs  throwing down a flock of birds like a gauntlet to the wind, stand  impassive as it lifts, whirls on a clap of laughter ... and as we  on foot, happy to be human, move on.
Cin Cin Cin Cinzaaaano, pow hands up se&ntilde;or it is end of the world Yes it's me &amp; I'm drunk again up inside greasy spoons off the Gran Via having survived evolutionary sadness for wine with my fish &amp; TV commercials Voyages, ahoy  O my past tensions: disguised as the Wolf Man I'll never get a haircut Edinburgh gals at American Express giggly concern for my mailishness. I shd quote them Annie McIntosh on Scotland where she sez: &ldquo;Land of Cold Knees&rdquo; circa 1960 A.D. Me African friends at Caf&eacute; No Recuerdo wasted on Plato, Franco's colonial pilots, theyd tell me where to go, they drink me beer toasts honor of my blood (as if theyd heard its lonely gurgle) Little Cuban lady (also Afro-) requires an Extra who can sing for a  concerns spooks in Spain (That aulde Scot song do go: &ldquo;Boots of spanish leather&rdquo; O dont it?) I am simply a drowsy young moor straight out of Ecclesiastes vanity vanishing at a dollar a day, Ol&eacute;.
<> The fields lie powdered under smoke and clouds. The swamps are peopled with smouldering cedar reflected on black, hoarded water. The furrow in the field behind the negro's heels smokes, as though the plowshare stirred embers in the earth. As the furrow lengthens; the rising powder fades to sky-dust below the powdered sky. This spongy land is parched and draws the salt sea to it, up all its earthy rivers. It drinks brine, like a thirsty goat. The river reeds are withered. It is April in the meadows but, in the empty rice fields it is Winter. The roots of the cedars drink slow fire under the sod. A flame seeps up the core,  a tall tree falls. From the bark, the white smoke bleeds. Midway between midnight and daybreak the sky egg cracks across. Goats move in sleep. Night then speaks with one dry boom. The goats veer in their steps and stir fire-flies from live oak trees with their small lightnings. One horned beast trots from the herd more in disdain than fright into the open, a little distance foraging. The old devil knows despite that bright, slow, loud antiphon it will not rain.
Maybe it is true we have to return to the black air of ashcan city because it is there the most life was burned, as ghosts or criminals return? But no, the city has no monopoly of intense life. The dust burned golden or violet in the wide land to which we ran away, images of passion sprang out of the land as whirlwinds or red flowers, your hands opened in anguish or clenched in violence under that sun, and clasped my hands in that place to which we will not return where so much happened that no one else noticed, where the city's ashes that we brought with us flew into the intense sky still burning.
Elaine hates touching the heads of the older women in Giovanni's. She has to cope with styles that are hardly more than a few strands clinging to bone as if nothing was wrong. She feels desperate until the smell of poor cooking is drowned by the detergent. Elaine, 17, is pregnant, but by whom? She was doing Ruby's hair today when it started to come away on the comb exactly like her mother's. &lsquo;It wasn't me,&rsquo; she wanted to say when the manageress shouted at her for spilling the dye, but the whole shop thought how lovely Ruby's hair looked when it came out coloured pink. &lsquo;Who's the lucky fella?&rsquo; asked Ruby's husband, putting his head round the door. But he knew it had to be him. Now the scissors are laid aside and the lampshades relieved of all the pimp-work they have to do on behalf of the mirrors. The reptilian manageress puts on the strip lighting with a frown and switches out the sign. Elaine, being junior, has to clear. She feels dead, but there's nowhere to go in this shallow lock-up to escape the stares from the street. She sweeps the day's clippings into a corner, remembering a time when she wanted to work her way up in Giovanni's as a colour artist. She picks up a handful of the hair and looks at it for a moment. Then she throws it back on the floor. She must hurry now if she doesn't want Simon to see her.
These dirt mounds make the dead seem fat. Crude walls of rock that hold the dirt when rain rides wild, were placed with skill or luck. No crucifix can make the drab boards of this chapel Catholic. A mass across these stones becomes whatever wail the wind decides is right. They asked for, got the Black Robe and the promised masses, well meant promises, shabby third hand crosses. This graveyard can expand, can crawl in all directions to the mountains, climb the mountains to the salmon and a sun that toned the arrows when animals were serious as meat. The dead are really fat, the houses lean from lack of loans. The river runs a thin bed down the useless flat where Flathead homes are spaced like friends. The dead are strange jammed this familial. A cheap fence separates the chapel from the graves. A forlorn lot like this, where snow must crawl to find the tribal stones, is more than just a grim result of cheat, Garfield's forgery, some aimless trek of horses from the stolen Bitter Root. Dead are buried here because the dead will always be obscure, wind the one thing whites will always give a chance.
Coming up Buchanan Street, quickly, on a sharp winter evening a young man and two girls, under the Christmas lights  The young man carries a new guitar in his arms, the girl on the inside carries a very young baby, and the girl on the outside carries a chihuahua. And the three of them are laughing, their breath rises in a cloud of happiness, and as they pass the boy says, &lsquo;Wait till he sees this but!&rsquo; The chihuahua has a tiny Royal Stewart tartan coat like a teapot-  holder, the baby in its white shawl is all bright eyes and mouth like favours  in a fresh sweet cake, the guitar swells out under its milky plastic cover, tied at the neck  with silver tinsel tape and a brisk sprig of mistletoe. Orphean sprig! Melting baby! Warm chihuahua! The vale of tears is powerless before you. Whether Christ is born, or is not born, you put paid to fate, it abdicates under the Christmas lights. Monsters of the year go blank, are scattered back, can't bear this march of three.  And the three have passed, vanished in the crowd (yet not vanished, for in their arms they wind the life of men and beasts, and music, laughter ringing them round like a guard) at the end of this winter's day.
Returning, I find her just the same, At just the same old delicate game. Still she says: &ldquo;Nay, loose no flame To lick me up and do me harm! Be all yourself! for oh, the charm Of your heart of fire in which I look! Oh, better there than in any book Glow and enact the dramas and dreams I love for ever! there it seems You are lovelier than life itself, till desire Comes licking through the bars of your lips, And over my face the stray fire slips, Leaving a burn and an ugly smart That will have the oil of illusion. Oh, heart Of fire and beauty, loose no more Your reptile flames of lust; ah, store Your passion in the basket of your soul, Be all yourself, one bonny, burning coal That stays with steady joy of its own fire! For in the firing all my porcelain Of flesh does crackle and shiver and break in pain, My ivory and marble black with stain, My veil of sensitive mystery rent in twain, My altars sullied, I bereft, remain A priestess execrable, taken in vain &rdquo;  So the refrain Sings itself over, and so the game Restarts itself wherein I am kept Like a glowing brazier faintly blue of flame, So that the delicate love-adept Can warm her hands and invite her soul, Sprinkling incense and salt of words And kisses pale, and sipping the toll Of incense-smoke that rises like birds. Yet I've forgotten in playing this game, Things I have known that shall have no name; Forgetting the place from which I came I watch her ward away the flame Yet warm herself at the fire then blame Me that I flicker in the basket; Me that I glow not with content To have my substance so subtly spent; Me that I interrupt her game ... I ought to be proud that she should ask it Of me to be her fire-opal.... It is well Since I am here for so short a spell Not to interrupt her? Why should I Break in by making any reply!
Master Will, so cussed human, Careless-clouted god o' speech, Is there twist o' man or woman Too well-hidden for thy reach? Diadems and broken roses, Wind and Tritons loud at horn, Sack-stains half thy screed discloses, Th' other half doth hold the morn. Some comfort 'tis to catch Will Shaxpeer stealing. All bards are thieves save Villon, master thief, Who pilfered naught but wine and then, wide reeling, Lilted his heart out, Ballad-Lord in chief. (True to his song's good, spit the fate hands dealing, With lips the bolder for a soul-hid grief.) When proud-pied April leadeth in his train And yellow crocus quick'neth to the breath Of Zephyr fleeting from the sun-shot rain, Then seek I her whom mine heart honoureth. She is a woodland sprite and suzerain Of every power that flouteth wintry death. When proud-pied April leadeth in his train And freeth all the earth from cold's mort-main, Then with her fairness mine heart journeyeth Thru bourgeon wood-ways wherein tourneyeth Earth's might of laughter 'gainst all laughter slain Ere proud-pied April led in feat his train.
When dark nights eat up afternoons I sweat onions in sunflower oil, weigh out carrots, a swede, and tapering baby parsnips with old-age skins on flesh that fattened underneath the light in a cradling of clay, grit, stones. I take the swede, a misshapen globe marred with scars, cut it in two. The apricot bulk makes my head hum with summer. I slice up the snow-white parsnips, then tip lentils, seeds of a butterfly- petalled plant, into the pan. Opening the door to throw peelings in a pail, I bump into snouting cold. It smells of woodsmoke, bites as I stare at the park bristled with black. Frost is stiffening leaves, grasses, and I feel myself woven to this land's Saxon past when winter was a giant who trampled crops in fields, snuffed breath with icicle fingers  though this was not the country of my forbears, though rootlessness was a wound I bore till turned thirty, I was warmed enough by love to put down roots in myself. When chill sinks its teeth in my ribs, I retreat to the stove, dip a spoon. The heat-swollen lentils are melting among the hulking vegetables, and yellowbrown as November woods. I add lemon and fried spices, stir them in, ladle the stew.
It was like a church to me. I entered it on soft foot, Breath held like a cap in the hand. It was quiet. What God was there made himself felt, Not listened to, in clean colours That brought a moistening of the eye, In movement of the wind over grass. There were no prayers said. But stillness Of the heart's passions that was praise Enough; and the mind's cession Of its kingdom. I walked on, Simple and poor, while the air crumbled And broke on me generously as bread.
In the redcoat she (who is I) was an angel, dark and bright. Mama chose the drama: pretty scarlet to subdue the white walk, a world dumb with snow, patentleather shoes to shine the path over ice. My father paid the way. His teeth salt inside the grin. I (who's she) had a manner of leaping toward a light suddenly running into ecstasy or heat, exquisitely blind in the body racing inside it- self. A little fit of imagining. Thin arms, cropped wings, to hold the bristly branches of fir, and sing- ing, sisters and brothers itching, happy from angelhair fine as a strand of cat hair split six ways and brushed into the skin to itch and itch again. We were wild and giddy with gifts. It was then and always as all souls itch and spin in lit-red coats that float down this narrow vein, so we spin in O, to someone who loves us and suffers the world for each turn before a mirror, quiet as ice, we fall all through at last here in memory's tiny Paradise.
It is the kindness of the rabbi I remember now, nine months after my sister's death. After the funeral, he took me aside and said,  <> Then it was summer, and I stood, a Jew among the Catholics of Florence, dropping my lire into the tin box with the mourners in Santa Maria Novella. My lover watched, estranged, and I could not explain why I needed to leave the bright piazzas, climb the steep steps to San Miniato al Monte and walk beside the dim paintings, down the long naves, past the spectacular tombs, to light candle after candle in Santo Spirito, Santa Maria del Carmine, Santa Croce. I paused on a bridge over the Arno and considered the way Italy resembled a vast cemetery, generations buried beneath the marble floors of every church. Like an island in the Venetian Lagoon, her life was a place I visited by boat, changed each time I arrived on shore. Now I dream her face, the color of a Bellini masterpiece, painted when he was old and saw his dead against the dawn light, blameless, cold. Already the grieving gather the candles and clothing they need for the seasons of mourning, naming themselves lover, mother, father, friend, brother, sister.
We didn't know at the time. It was for us, a telephone call through the world and nobody answered. We thought it was a train far off giving its horn, roving its headlight side to side in its tunnel of darkness and shaking the bridge and our house till dishes rattled, and going away. We thought it a breath climbing the well where Kim almost fell in; it was a breath saying his name, and &ldquo;Almost got you,&rdquo; but we piled boards and bricks on top and held off that voice. Or maybe it was the song in the stove  walnut and elm giving forth stored sunlight through that narrow glass eye on the front in the black door that held in the fire. Or a sigh from under the mound of snow where Bret's little car with its toy wheels nestled all winter ready to roll, come spring, and varoom when his feet toddled it along. Or listen in the cardboard house we built by the kitchen wall, a doorknob drawn with crayon, Kit's little window peeking out by the table is it a message from there? And from Aunt Helen's room where she sews all day on a comforter made out of pieces of Grandma's dresses, and the suits for church maybe those patches rustle their message in her fingers: &ldquo;Dorothy, for you, and for all the family I sew that we may be warm in the house by the tracks.&rdquo; I don't know, but there was a voice, those times, a call through the world that almost rang everywhere, and we looked up Dorothy, Helen, Bret, Kim, Kit and only the snow shifted its foot outside in the wind, and nobody heard.
O what could be more nice Than her ways with a man? She kissed me more than twice Once we were left alone. Who'd look when he could feel? She'd more sides than a seal. The close air faintly stirred. Light deepened to a bell, The love-beat of a bird. She kept her body still And watched the weather flow. We live by what we do. All's known, all, all around: The shape of things to be; A green thing loves the green And loves the living ground. The deep shade gathers night; She changed with changing light. We met to leave again The time we broke from time; A cold air brought its rain, The singing of a stem. She sang a final song; Light listened when she sang.
As long as we are lost In the world of purpose We are not free. I sit In my ten foot square hut. The birds sing. The bees hum. The leaves sway. The water Murmurs over the rocks. The canyon shuts me in. If I moved, Basho's frog Would splash in the pool. All summer long the gold Laurel leaves fell through space. Today I was aware Of a maple leaf floating On the pool. In the night I stare into the fire. Once I saw fire cities, Towns, palaces, wars, Heroic adventures, In the campfires of youth. Now I see only fire. My breath moves quietly. The stars move overhead. In the clear darkness Only a small red glow Is left in the ashes. On the table lies a cast Snake skin and an uncut stone.
After they had broken bread One of the two men said to Him, &lsquo;Now you have risen from the dead Why not some fresh momentous miracle?&rsquo; Not a word spoke He. &lsquo;Strike while the iron is hot, And swell the gospel! A miracle or two would crown your ministry, And ease our lot.&rsquo; Still came no answer. &lsquo;Not necessarily a new one, Master.&rsquo; He turned towards his friend: &lsquo;Wouldn't you agree?  Like walking once again upon the water ...&rsquo; &lsquo;That cannot be,&rsquo; replied the other, &lsquo;Now there are holes in his feet, remember!&rsquo; A stony silence would suffice, But then He spoke. &lsquo;Every true redeemer, Like every faith deserving of the price, Has need of a blasphemer. One day you too will be in paradise.&rsquo;
Light comes from stillness, and the leaves are made Where a beam kills time's origin and scheme, Leaving pure terror, till they wind and gleam, Twice-born, of marvel, sleeping in light's shade. Then to the fair, bright, gentle, savage head Delight coils upward, bursting from the stem. Men see not this, for light is blinding them, Which flies, outrunning time, yet has not fled. Whether leaves move in wind or, windless, stay, Light's ancient path revives them. Let the flight Of birds make one leaf fall, the others play. That leaf which flourished and was graced with light Changes no atom, and through senseless night Moves, in its burial, on the selfsame way.
Erect in the movies with a new job, <> and  unfold in a twinbill: drums, wild dancing, naked men, the silver veils on the South Side. He imagines nothing: it is all before him, born in a dream: a gorilla broke loose from his zoo in a tuxedo: baboon. You pick your red bottom. The Daltons are the movies. On my wall are pictures: Jack Johnson, Joe Louis, Harlow and Rogers: &ldquo;see the white god and die.&rdquo; Underground I live in veils, brick and cement, the confession beaten out, slung with hung carcasses, a bloody cleaver grunting, a dead baby in the sewer: &ldquo;all the people I saw were guilty.&rdquo; Marked black I was shot, <> without an image of act or thought <> The rape: &ldquo;Mrs. Dalton, it's me, Bigger, I've brought Miss Dalton home and she's drunk&rdquo;: to be the idea in these minds, <> father and leader where is my king, veils of kingship will lead these folks <> &ldquo;see the white gods and die&rdquo; <>
It is Thursday, October 23rd. You like Thursday; Your baby was born On the same day as your mother. You are all tied together in a jaw. I was thinking how you always notice The first bit of brown breath That reaches the grass. Do you notice me? Obviously This writing has its own desire; I can see it reaching for your hands. And on this strange Thursday Beginning to feel cold enough for more blankets I will ask you to marry me ... Marry me. But you have not read this yet And are not as surprised as I am, Out back digging this pit And trying to turn the weeds black, That I think it is time to marry again  To join our hands Like the indelible seasons, Yours white and mine black. For I have finally come to believe In our own inner necessities as they are, Our own Scheherazades And the ocean of our streams of story That has made us join our hearts So we are Not lost after all as I thought.
Caught in the window breath of air lately on the big round wood table under the spruce, a level outside to work on &amp; let the air love me. The children of light summon this apparition, church in the world . church of the world, angel disguised as a spruce tree) Ralegh appears in the dusk, his queen a lost memory: &ldquo;I was kinder when I loved her &amp; sailed to the island for her, this spindle island half as big as the world. Tell her for me the years delight to pass &amp; the cool air of July is sweet under love's trees. On this big roll of parchment a map of these fields, thousands of miles, waters, &amp; on the little vellum folded in four my plan of the City we will one day begin to build her  the legend is in cipher to protect our studied proportions from foreign architects. The stone she sent me casts no shadow. Tell her for me in love's name we will go on trying forever, rising &amp; falling on the sweet wave of the work she gave us. Quincunx in the garden, a knot of simples round me as, I write, I smell them around me all afternoon as I thank her for my death &amp; all the Last Things, tansy, campion, rue, basil, stavesacre, their air blows kindly through my house where in the evening fire I see the faces of all her lovers dancing with her, amiable, not too fast, &amp; therein even her particularity merges in all lovers whatsoever in that glowing white hot place below the flame in the heart of the incandescent wood where all the images stand still.&rdquo;
I went back the other day to collect my motorbike from the local police station. I couldn't believe that lonely northern outpost where I went to school was barely half an hour from London by train: not far away and long ago as I had imagined, but facing the future surrounding by Kodak bungalows and flyovers, its dreaded Tower a little spiral staircase with geraniums in window boxes. I skidded on the gravel outside the headmaster's study, shot round the side past the library, the Chapel, the &lsquo;Private Side&rsquo;, hoping to escape without being seen via the tradesmen's entrance into Locker's Lane. Blocking my path, clipboard and pen at the ready, stood JADS, brick-faced Classics master and assistant head, shouting my name and bearing down on me, exactly the same as when he was alive.
every day i find a new life. my love for freedom, our right to wear robes as we please, never sets. black voices dance in my soul like anxious sparkles. every black man is an epic, sung in the soft keys of survival. o i want, i want, i want to hear be near all my brothers when i die
Wise men in their bad hours have envied The little people making merry like grasshoppers In spots of sunlight, hardly thinking Backward but never forward, and if they somehow Take hold upon the future they do it Half asleep, with the tools of generation Foolishly reduplicating Folly in thirty-year periods; they eat and laugh too, Groan against labors, wars and partings, Dance, talk, dress and undress; wise men have pretended The summer insects enviable; One must indulge the wise in moments of mockery. Strength and desire possess the future, The breed of the grasshopper shrills, &ldquo;What does the future Matter, we shall be dead?&rdquo; Ah grasshoppers, Death's a fierce meadowlark: but to die having made Something more equal to the centuries Than muscle and bone, is mostly to shed weakness. The mountains are dead stone, the people Admire or hate their stature, their insolent quietness, The mountains are not softened nor troubled And a few dead men's thoughts have the same temper.
JW (from the Danelaw) says: They don't know they spoil and from the beginning. and as those words go down they set free, he is non-referential in that moment this John Winthrop had as a leader Vedic senses he was a magistrate in the mixed rulethe people were the libertythe ministry were the purity Hebraic and the civil, which Winthrop was, was authority. 1593 Arisleus' Vision was published Basel to make sure that what was known was passed on to posterity viz that the planting shall be on the widest possible ground
If any guest comes in to tea Miss Ellen's gay as one could hope. She sits and knits incessantly Yellow and white or heliotrope. She says, &ldquo;This happened yesterday,&rdquo; Or, &ldquo;How the days are growing short, It's scarcely five, and the sky's gray,&rdquo; &ldquo;But then, of course, she's not our sort.&rdquo; Then tea comes in with squares of toast, Dusted with sweetened cinnamon, And cakes which are Miss Ellen's boast Whenever cakes are touched upon. With sprightly grace she brews her tea And fills each cup with amber light And fragrant warmth. Then first you see How thin her face is, and how white The broken shadows of her hair, And from her eyes guess what regret Is master of that gracious air. But then she smiles and you forget. And if you stay to chat a bit You'll find her gay as one could hope; Like silver flies the needles flit Through yellow, white and heliotrope. But when the room's a violet dusk, And all the ghostly candles stir Their airy fingers, hints of musk Mingle with long-dried lavender. For then Miss Ellen's knees are weighed With a box of dark, rich-scented wood, Where youth and vanity are laid With all whose beauty has withstood Miss Ellen's fading suns and snows: Carven marvels of ivory, Yellowing laces, ruined rose, And fans that are filmy coquetry. Then sometimes with a quiet grace She'll smile at the air where nothing is, And spreading her fan's stiff pattern lace, Lift her hand for a phantom kiss. And then again till late at night, She'll sit and stare with vacant eyes Where youth and beauty and delight Lie hid in their scented secrecies.
Where were you when the sun went down  and the red star arose? I was cultivating daisies for  Posthumous Flower Shows. Where were you when the rain began,  the rain as heavy as blood? I was washing from my hands  the common or garden mud. Where were you when the men and women  and children began to die? I was watching from my bedroom window  with a knowledgeable eye. Where were you when four horsemen rode  out of Apocalypse? I lay in bed with a Paddington whore  counting her umpteen tits. Where were you when the angel called  banging at the door? I was too fast asleep to know  what he was banging for. Where were you when they blew my brains  like eggs out on the bed? I was standing with a little gun  pointed at your head.
<> Hide him in lonely garrets, if you will,  But his hard, human pulse is throbbing still With the sure strength that fearless truth endows. In spite of all fine science disavows, Of his plain excellence and stubborn skill There yet remains what fashion cannot kill, Though years have thinned the laurel from his brows. Whether or not we read him, we can feel From time to time the vigor of his name Against us like a finger for the shame And emptiness of what our souls reveal In books that are as altars where we kneel To consecrate the flicker, not the flame.
From desire to desire plucking white petals away from their green centres. repeats the head, the fantasist. No matter: that wind sweeps forward again life itself. Gather them, flawed, curled veined like a child's temple heaped one on another irregular displaced at a breath: secrets ... <> <> <> <> And the stripped green? Alert, hard on a thick stalk. So.
<> Off in a far strand Where is no love, no pity, And no kind hand, But dull dreams Pass in the dark silence Of tall grass and cool streams. A dark city shines In the dusk of a far strand And the walls touch the tall pines That grow on either hand Where dim dreams Pass in the dark whisper Of tall trees and spent streams. There is a dark city In the depths of a mad mind Where neither love nor pity Shall ever be divined, But dead dreams Pass in the dark temple Of thwarted hopes and memory-gleams.
He trembles upon the verge of fourscore. A white hat with a yellow lining is no indication of wisdom suitable to so great an age. He can go but one step farther in the road of impropriety and direct his executor to bury him in it. He is a very little man and had he lined his hat with pink instead of yellow, might have been gathered by a natural mistake for a mushroom and sent off in a basket.
He dropped, more sullenly than wearily, Lay stupid like a cod, heavy like meat, And none of us could kick him to his feet;  Just blinked at my revolver, blearily;  Didn't appear to know a war was on, Or see the blasted trench at which he stared. &lsquo;I'll do &lsquo;em in,&rsquo; he whined. &lsquo;If this hand's spared, I'll murder them, I will.&rsquo;     A low voice said, &lsquo;It's Blighty, p'raps, he sees; his pluck's all gone, Dreaming of all the valiant, that  Bold uncles, smiling ministerially; Maybe his brave young wife, getting her fun In some new home, improved materially. It's not these stiffs have crazed him; nor the Hun.&rsquo; We sent him down at last, out of the way. Unwounded; stout lad, too, before that strafe. Malingering? Stretcher-bearers winked, &lsquo;Not half!&rsquo; Next day I heard the Doc's well-whiskied laugh: &lsquo;That scum you sent last night soon died. Hooray!&rsquo;
Lady, my lady, come from out the garden, Clay-fingered, dirty-smocked, and in my time I too shall learn the quietness of Arden, Knowledge so long a stranger to my rhyme. What were more fitting than your springtime task? Here, close-engirdled by your vines and flowers Surely there is no other grace to ask, No better cloister from the bickering hours. A step beyond, the dingy streets begin With all their farce, and silly tragedy  But here, unmindful of the futile din You grow your flowers, far wiser certainly. You and your garden sum the same to me, A sense of strange and momentary pleasure, And beauty snatched oh, fragmentarily Perhaps, yet who can boast of other seizure? Oh, you have somehow robbed, I know not how, The secret of the loveliness of these Whom you have served so long. Oh, shameless, now You flaunt the winnings of your thieveries. Thus, I exclaim against you, profiteer.... For purpled evenings spent in pleasing toil, Should you have gained so easily the dear Capricious largesse of the miser soil? Colorful living in a world grown dull, Quiet sufficiency in weakling days, Delicate happiness, more beautiful For lighting up belittered, grimy ways  Surely I think I shall remember this, You in your old, rough dress, bedaubed with clay, Your smudgy face parading happiness, Life's puzzle solved. Perhaps, in turn, you may One time, while clipping bushes, tending vines, (Making your brave, sly mock at dastard days), Laugh gently at these trivial, truthful lines  And that will be sufficient for my praise.
I imagine her trying, trying to catch it. First, dusting dutifully, slow now for the child leans heavily under her dress, she finds the web behind her hand loom. Her frail hands mean to weave a birth cloth, but time has speeded up on her. On her face, the worst black shadow crawls and squats and waits. At last, delicately, she moves the loom to discovery. The black spot hunches in the black heart of the corner, snoozing in maternal reverie. Her hands, now, shake. The web gleams like art. She feels heavier, her fast blood slows to paste. An hour later, pulse loud as a truck, she kneels with the glass jar and strikes out at it. Legs black as a satin dinner dress uncoil and dance her back in memory to moves quick still in her body. Clumsy, afraid, she fails the first time, then screws tight the metal seal, but punches a small hole for air. All afternoon she keeps it in the refrigerator, admiring that red jewel she cannot bear to smash. Home from work, a husband, I find the thing is mine to kill, like memory. She won't watch. In the yard the sun boils, the sky is sheer blue. I tell her it is a small thing she must put away like clothing in a cardboard box. I hold her, driven to distance by the swollen bulb of her womb, but she cries and shivers. At night she wakes from dreams of a world shatteringly bright and of her girlish waist gone, with my foot on it like an executioner. She swears she's full of spiders, still half asleep, and kicks the blankets off to lie naked in a little light like an hourglass. Accused, I sink in my own dark, the itch-glide on my skin the fear of what she bears and flees.
Down to Eldorado, Love, Eldorado, land of song, Where the canopy of red In the dying day is hung; Where the chill of summer sea Brings a joy to you and me,  Down at fairy Eldorado. Down to Eldorado, Love, On a palfrey, white as snow; Up a chiseled mountain steep, On a palfrey we shall go; And our lips the dew shall drink On the silver river's brink,  Down at rosy Eldorado. Down to Eldorado, Love, Where the crimson songsters sing; From the green, green bough at noon, Notes of crimson songsters ring, And the land is full of joy, Like a happy, year-old boy,  Down at golden Eldorado. Down to Eldorado, Love, Over steeple, over spire; In the darkness of the night, Hangs the moon and all its fire; And two hearts are wildly glad, And two hearts are wildly mad,  Down at moonlit Eldorado.
Pockets puffed with bottles, hair stiff, rising in gray wind. He comes to a dog without hair sleeping in the weeds near the old Packard plant, reads &ldquo;can't see&rdquo; in the dust of a window. One April morning as spiders walk on soft, black stones and the colors of motor oil spread in rainwater pools I am where he is, but I don't look him in the eyes, I don't want to hold him and tell him Yes if he asks something. Above us white smoke drifts with large dark clouds toward old Poletown, where the houses are gone. Now it is September and I am there, between the silhouette of broken fences and weeds with yellow hair seizing their own piece of buried sun. Rain streams down my face, a poplar breathes over the only house I can see, burned and gutted. The only sign of human life is the crashing sound of a bottle thrown hard on cement, east of this wasteland, where the towers smoke.
<>  Of labour and long endurance for the Truth:  Love's sea at flood in the rash heart of Youth,  Freedom and spiritual ecstasies! Incredible are the discoveries  Of Life's adventure: on the high, outcast,  Star-severed pathways Life may stand at last  Thrilled witness of the soul's divinities! And always Night beyond! infinite, strange,  Teeming, inviolate, where the peaks of thought,  Flushed by an unseen Dawn, superbly range Down the long frontiers whence the restless soul,  Forward, beyond the last and best it sought,  Still finds a path, a prospect and a goal!
<> Here where the dull sun shines this afternoon As desolate as ever the dead moon Did glimmer on dead Sardis, men were gay; And there were little children here to play, With small soft hands that once did keep in tune The strings that stretch from heaven, till too soon The change came, and the music passed away. Now there is nothing but the ghosts of things,  No life, no love, no children, and no men; And over the forgotten place there clings The strange and unrememberable light That is in dreams. The music failed, and then God frowned, and shut the village from His sight.
The tufted gold of the sassafras,  And the gold of the spicewood-bush, Bewilder the ways of the forest pass,  And brighten the underbrush: The white-starred drifts of the wild-plum tree,  And the haw with its pearly plumes, And the redbud, misted rosily,  Dazzle the woodland glooms. And I hear the song of the cat-bird wake  I' the boughs o' the gnarled wild-crab, Or there where the snows of the dogwood shake,  That the silvery sunbeams stab: And it seems to me that a magic lies  In the crystal sweet of its notes, That a myriad blossoms open their eyes  As its strain above them floats. I see the bluebell's blue unclose,  And the trillium's stainless white; The bird-foot violet's purple and rose,  And the poppy, golden-bright! And I see the eyes of the bluet wink,  And the heads of the white-hearts nod; And the baby mouths of the woodland pink  And the sorrel salute the sod. And this, meseems, does the cat-bird say,  As the blossoms crowd i' the sun:  &ldquo;Up, up! and out! oh, out and away!  Up, up! and out, each one! Sweethearts! sweethearts! oh, sweet, sweet, sweet!  Come listen and hark to me! The Spring, the Spring, with her fragrant feet, Is passing this way! Oh, hark to the beat Of her bee-like heart! Oh, sweet, sweet, sweet!  Come! open your eyes and see!   See, see, see!&rdquo;
And shall it be, when white thorns flake With blossoms all the Maytime brake,  The rustle of a flower or leaf   Will let thee know  That I am near thee, as thy grief,   As long ago? Or shall it be, when blows and dies The wood-anemone, two eyes  Will gaze in thine, as faint as frost?   And thou, in dreams,  Wilt hear the sigh of one long lost,   Who near thee seems. Or shall it be, where waters soothe The stillness, thou wilt hear the smooth  Dim notes of a familiar lute,   And in thine ears  Old Provence melodies, long mute,   Like falling tears? . . Now doff my helm. Loop thy white arm Beneath my hair. So. Let thy warm  Blue eyes gaze in mine for a space,   A little while . . .  Love, it will rest me . . . And thy face    Ah, let it smile. Now art thou thou. Yet let thy hair, A golden wonder, fall; thy fair  Full throat bend low; thy kiss be hot   With love, not dry  With anguish. Sweet, my Evalott!   Now let me die.
A plain black cotton dress On a wire hanger In a closet otherwise empty, Its door ajar to the light. If you open your eyes, You'll note it sways ever so slightly, It shudders in the draft Of undetermined origin. Or is it your own breath? Reaching that far Despite the miles of frozen Stubble, stone, earth. If you close your eyes, There's even a tiny rip On the level of thighs, The curlicue of blackest thread.
Come up the narrow stair to the fourth-floor room And I will show you mystery freed of doom, Initiation without ordeal, religion rid of anguish of mind, The magic you cannot find In your typist's day, at the Woolworth counter, in queues for shoes, In the one-and-ninepennies worshipping Bing as he sings the Blues: Something you miss Between the dancehall and the doorstep kiss: A flicker of half-seen faces, Incense in empty places, Light for the eyes that neon lighting tires, Smoky fires, Something you cannot squeeze Between opening time and finish-your-drinks-up-please, And find, perhaps, in dreambook revelations And Moon in Cancer and auras and emanations, In this magic of half-belief and wonder, in this Quick brush with bliss.
The blood in me, assumes a beautiful shape, it assumes that I can write, and that I am the great mind of my own soul, in a fit of fall flashing bells, the great booms and machines that make the world worth exploding and re- building, for whatever we agree on is most honorable. There is no struggle to speak if you want to. There is no slowness or stupidity we must bear. There is perfection! There is grace! There are all those things they talked about ... but different! Jesus Christ, how different! How much bullshit did they put into our way, how much ugliness we canonized, dazed and dazzing in The Music is so strong, it smashes through the boards. It questions the beat of my mind, where the soul beats against the iron badges of a cage. How hateful can be anything. How it can turn you, resur- rect your errors as if the mind laughed at what it hated to use, and used the fingers of your consciousness to dazzle yourself with madness. We can be used by everything. We are not in danger of being wrong. Only stupid, in the quiet despotic night. Oh, how the freaks of this adventure sadden, the old ladies walking by scared and scaring, not even caring that the world is falling apart, and even the intellectuals will be killed. Oh, Christ you don't understand. I don't understand what the problem has to do with this woman's lips, or that woman's understanding of why is the world is finally so ugly, even though you're right. The world is the most perfect thing in the soul. The world is a soul, and we are souls if we remember the murmurs of the spirit.
Our adoration must not be humble lowness is no gift to what is beautiful or rules serene in the hysteria of heroic action knowing the world her own. Neither humility nor false relation, as by imputation an adjective leans upon a noun and claims at least for an evening to possess it, and in the claim lies an impertinent definition to which the Queen, that sum of all our nouns (&ldquo;Our Queen&rdquo;) might like to lodge exception. And where is excess then? Misheard to the brink of the scaffold submitted to that separation of body from its primary comparable to expunging all modifiers from the noun. His head. Her heart. Her throne. His devotion.
If sound, then why not the full reach of mind, and if that cantilever then why not the whole keyboard with its totality of partials? <> disciple,  <> <> to his ambitious aspirant,  <> in twice four, carols a bobolink at midtree, the golden sections of sight flap nostalgic for sound. But of touch there is no ratio, there are only gradient, ascent, compression, easing, and space evacuated, not yearning; filled. Therefore, Belov&egrave;d, middle is neither midmost nor at the squeezed core, but where breath resumes. A man who had killed in order to save life, and had left his clan to guide the foreigner, never went home. Or, home was what he came to. The girl who knew that something before and after, of which no one spoke, was always brimming now, came to his corner, knitted, did not speak. What had striven in him and was seeding in her gazed out over the harbor, through white sails crossing. Simply because temple and trave rise framed like verse of the Silver Age, it's not dreaming back to loop out with those curves on sunflower faces  points on their net, widening, hold tight in casts of fishermen, fowlers, and high buds leafing stone along the load-bearing wall. Lighthouse beacon sweeps over, that arm bends, star swirl releasing the torch to a dark cycle. The beginning of the third Razumovsky quartet sets one in midstream doubt, amberish dam for joy's spillover: true beginning starts late. Slaying the interlopers, he has only just told her he must go off again, she accepts, neither climax nor close is the end in their lightning. And the shaft of it shearing down, it is steadily here, and the clamor in it is calm, its roar a vast silence.
Perhaps he built a throne as you would place A chair for a friend, in a particular light; But no friend came that day. And so his preparations Went on and on, becoming more filled with desire And gold: more tables of offering, more flags Of Presence, more scepters of His power laid Ready for His hand. It was all made from trash, The refuse of government offices, in which he wrapped Dead lightbulbs and used furniture salvaged, Or bought. And he wrote prophetic announcements In watery lavender, like Constantine Who used no other color. I liken the brightness Of what he made to the desire of the male That builds up a golden throne for the greater Poet to come, of whom we say: &ldquo;Except The one face there is nothing else.&rdquo; This is The madness of great love. And great love Changes all things. As once by the sea I went Down  The vast sea; and I heard the whole of it Shift in its bed and rise toward me grown From all its throats, and from each throat a thousand Particular voices, and each voice unanswerable; And I saw the huge trunk of a dead tree, Cut elsewhere and heaved up there. And I knew then For myself beyond the grim scavage of art  The desolation of the world and ignorance Of the heart. Therefore, call Him the high  And build up His throne composed of lost things  According to the ordinance of knops and flowers: A chair for the lost one of lost things made, An imperial friend who comes to sit In the kingdom of our patience and the courtesy Of our sexual gold. Hang out more flags, More and more flags.... Let there be more scepters of His power laid; Inscribe more glyphs of announcement in watery Lavender. Hammer in more gold, more gold, more gold. Summon The school children to see what we have done; <>
Once, my father took me to the Rockaways during a hurricane to see how the ocean was behaving, which made my mother furious, whose love was correct, protective. We saw a wooden jetty crumble. We saw water rise to the boardwalk, felt the wildness of its spray. That night: silence at dinner, a storm born of cooler, more familiar air. My father always rode his delightful errors into trouble. Mother waited for them, alertly, the way the oppressed wait for their historical moment. Weekdays, after six, I'd point my bicycle toward the Fleet Street Inn to fetch him for dinner. All his friends were there, high-spirited lonelies, Irish, full of laughter. It was a shame that he was there, a shame to urge him home. Who was I then but a boy who had learned to love the wind, the wind that would go its own way, regardless. I must have thought damage is just what happens.
Though all forsake thee, lord, yet I will die, For I have chained so my will to thine That I have no will left my will to untwine, But will abide with thee most willingly. Though all forsake thee, lord, yet cannot I, For love hath wrought in me thy form divine That thou art more my heart than heart is mine: How can I then from myself, thyself, fly? Thus thought St. Peter and thus thinking fell, And by his fall did warn us not to swell, Yet still in love I say I would not fall, And say in hope I trust I never shall, But cannot say in faith, what might I do To learn to say it, by hearing Christ say so!
My mother was Dutch My father a Jew And that is why I Am so different from you. I like to sit and pry and peer And poke and watch the light of fear Shine in your eyes As I grow wise And my sagacious fingers press The very root and core of your distress. Shall I make my fingers pause Stay a while and turn and cause The intellectual ray I so despise Fade in your eyes, Drowned by the tears that rise Because my touch is wise?
Some sleep away the years until the headlands thaw. Some build their sails for April's flood. The ships put out on wheels of salt and leave their foaming spokes behind to shatter on black gravel. One by one they founder and they fail; the sunken-hearted crews breathe water like any other drowners. So you set out in your dinghy to row by that light, the river your note from a mutual friend: you'll introduce yourself to the sea in stages. Storms come to stir the swell, wind comes churning a course toward the rocks that could calm you like those sailors. The rapids open onto ocean, you cannot steer except toward true north. So you drift without a rudder except your hand that burns to let you know you're freezing. (If you had no history you could wash ashore.) You might call that current night, if night weren't hung behind you, the backdrop to your magic lantern of survivors clinging to a raft in Arctic weather, if the light weren't frayed and torn around the frame. (If you had no name you could float like some floe.) You lay yourself to sleep with sheets of snow, wake to regret the morning, drifts like waves.
Alaska's rape dismemberment disassembled piece by piece and shipped to the lower forty-eight so that people in Dallas may own whale- sized cadillacs and lear jets which cost Alaska an arm and a leg just like ravished Jamaica whose stolen sugar built Mansfield Park where idle gang rapers discuss flower beds and old furniture Jamaica, Alaska, sisters dragged into an alley used and abandoned
Always, sweetheart, Carry into your room the blossoming boughs of cherry, Almond and apple and pear diffuse with light, that very Soon strews itself on the floor; and keep the radiance of spring Fresh quivering; keep the sunny-swift March-days waiting In a little throng at your door, and admit the one who is  plaiting Her hair for womanhood, and play awhile with her, then  bid her depart.  A come and go of March-day loves  Through the flower-vine, trailing screen;   A fluttering in of doves.  Then a launch abroad of shrinking doves  Over the waste where no hope is seen  Of open hands:    Dance in and out  Small-bosomed girls of the spring of love,  With a bubble of laughter, and shrilly shout  Of mirth; then the dripping of tears on your glove.
They had stood in the sun and piled up these stones to tell us life was that hard and that high and wide and filled with so many tall steps that needed our hands and legs and full strength to rise upon; and now descendants, lives no grander, no gayer, no easier by one less stone who still drink from sandy wells, they do not deny it clamber upon them with their children on a picnic spree. What have you taught them but the exercise of their wills, to make a jest of their hardships? They shall ascend, each child and his parent, to wisdom's face and mount the body as on a flying lion for the love of it that one moment permits before the next; and then, not to fall to tears and helpless rage, descend racing in a game.
<> In the cemetery men call a city, And feel the cold wind that noses at all windows, I am swept by the old eternal pity. All the old confusion blows over me, Sadness, beauty, loneliness, wave on wave; I walk through the grey streets, I have nowhere to go, I cannot walk anywhere but over my grave. In every house I see a tense, dumb appeal Of the many dead who do not want to die; All the roofs are the lifted hands of the dust Beseeching the blue aloofness of the sky. I speak to a man, I speak to a dead man ... I have nowhere to go, I walk through the grey streets; A chill gravestone is waiting for me somewhere; The years are beating in people's footbeats. When I walk among the gravestones men call houses, In the cemetery men call a city, And feel the cold wind that noses at all windows, I am swept by the old eternal pity.
The first time I saw her I trembled At her beauty. But the second time There was mockery, even hostility In her tone. On our next meeting, To defend myself, I used lines from Martial, one of his nasty bits: Os et labra tibi lingit, catellus; Non miror, merdas si libet esse Cani (which means: your little dog Licks your face and lips: I'm not Surprised, I knew dogs like to eat Shit). To my surprise she understood What I had said and replied from The same poet: ventris onus misero, Nec te pudet, excipis auro (aren't You ashamed to deposit your load In a golden bowl, you show-off?). &ldquo;You are a crude vain pig,&rdquo; she Told me, &ldquo;but at least you have Something between your ears.&rdquo; After that we met now and then In various romantic locations Along the banks of the Isar in Munich. There were little word Swords from both sides. But When we'd exhausted each others' Shafts there were no amorous Sequels to our conversations. She demurred at being kissed And even refused to hold hands As we strolled through the English Gardens. It was back To the beginning. I trembled At her beauty and she called Me &ldquo;Schweinlichkins.&rdquo; I'd like To know what has become of her. Whom is she tormenting now?
Christmas eve and no presents; the snow's in the mountains; the fat saint hasn't gotten his witless teamwork from ski trails and mushroomed mountaintops; the lake water is truly sky-blue  everybody's waiting for dark. The minstrels take the lawns to attract the skyflies coming at midnight, in flight, red-suited saint, with his whip and his sack full of toys: it can't be Halloween. My backyard is covered with snow; eight rabbits in reins settle their cottontail feet in the molasses earth and begin their whimsical dancing, a figure-eight cycle of rhythm and blues. I see rose-thorned tambourines: see that green honey-dewed fruit, see the white sheets and pillow cases; see that grayhaired black story-teller on the porch swing; even you are a believer.
<> The thunder of the guns will be quieted, the armies Will slip away, dissolve, into the cities, The hamlets, the farms: they will be dispersed, And we shall be rid of them. Do not break: there will be time, afterwards: The world will be quiet, licking its terrible wounds, Waiting a little while: the men of the armies Will go from our lives to the lives they knew before. There will be quiet, I tell you: paths Deep in fallen leaves, leading through forests, Plateaus that keep in their tall canyons The crumbling towers of the ancients. There will be fields, deserts, made beautiful By quiet: there will be lines of shore, Rocky and strewn with strange bright-colored shells On which the seas will crash and foam in a wild And beautiful inhumanity, where men, Listening, can find nobility again.
&ldquo; At a great beech-tree's root, &ldquo;are my best friends. Upon their love it seems my life depends. No dog or woman for me! Give me a tree! In winter saying, &lsquo;Courage! hold to me!&rsquo; In spring, &lsquo;Look up! hope's here, and winter ends!&rsquo; In summer, &lsquo;Come! here's peace that naught transcends!&rsquo; In autumn, &lsquo;See! the dreams I bring to thee!&rsquo; Why, I have loved a tree until for me It had a soul. And as the Greeks believed So I believe: that in  Lovely, ecstatic, that some man may see Take on material form, and, so perceived, Hold him for aye. ... That's why I have no wife.&rdquo;
In the evening my griefs come to me one by one. They tell me what I had hoped to forget. They perch on my shoulders like mourning doves. They are the color of light fading. In the day they come back wearing disguises. I rock and rock in the warm amnesia of sun. When my griefs sing to me from the bright throats of thrushes I sing back.
Starter! Her face is pale In the doorway light. Her lips blood red And her skin blue white. Taxi! I'm tired. Deep ... River.... O, God, please! The river and the moon hold memories. Cornets play. Dancers whirl. Death, be kind. What was the cover charge, kid? To a little drowned girl.
From what they did they walk exonerated     one dark evening. The gathered have to suck at the stopped air.     That this will not be tried because too many know or care shocks only idiots nowadays. They walk     from what they did exonerated not in law but fact.     A puff of chalk dust wipes reports already halfway written. They squash escorted on through cameras     flashing but then lurching backwards like some panicked troop     uncaptained and afraid of the uniform and jaw of the just cleared. They stroll a blade of silence to their black     and black-windowed cars. From in them, each a king as all are kings     who one dark evening drive from what they did exonerated, they see you people, shocked to be found no whiter     than they are, scratch, get heaved away like heartburn. One detective,     innocently settled to hear all human speech shrink to confession, as lies have been and fact will be and soon     silence, disappears into his vast suburban fortress, just     as rain begins to fall like rain that means to fall for years.
Do you remember once, in Paris of glad faces,  The night we wandered off under the third moon's rays And, leaving far behind bright streets and busy places,  Stood where the Seine flowed down between its quiet quais? The city's voice was hushed; the placid, lustrous waters  Mirrored the walls across where orange windows burned. Out of the starry south provoking rumors brought us  Far promise of the spring already northward turned. And breast drew near to breast, and round its soft desire  My arm uncertain stole and clung there unrepelled. I thought that nevermore my heart would hover nigher  To the last flower of bliss that Nature's garden held. There, in your beauty's sweet abandonment to pleasure,  The mute, half-open lips and tender, wondering eyes, I saw embodied first smile back on me the treasure  Long sought across the seas and back of summer skies. Dear face, when courted Death shall claim my limbs and find them  Laid in some desert place, alone or where the tides Of war's tumultuous waves on the wet sands behind them  Leave rifts of gasping life when their red flood subsides, Out of the past's remote delirious abysses  Shine forth once more as then you shone, beloved head, Laid back in ecstasy between our blinding kisses,  Transfigured with the bliss of being so coveted. And my sick arms will part, and though hot fever sear it,  My mouth will curve again with the old, tender flame. And darkness will come down, still finding in my spirit  The dream of your brief love, and on my lips your name. You loved me on that moonlit night long since. You were my queen and I the charming prince Elected from a world of mortal men. You loved me once. ... What pity was it, then, You loved not Love. ... Deep in the emerald west Like a returning caravel caressed By breezes that load all the ambient airs With clinging fragrance of the bales it bears From harbors where the caravans come down, I see over the roof-tops of the town The new moon back again, but shall not see The joy that once it had in store for me, Nor know again the voice upon the stair, The little studio in the candle-glare, And all that makes in word and touch and glance The bliss of the first nights of a romance When will to love and be beloved casts out The want to question or the will to doubt. You loved me once. ... Under the western seas The pale moon settles and the Pleiades. The firelight sinks; outside the night-winds moan  The hour advances, and I sleep alone. Farewell, dear heart, enough of vain despairing!  If I have erred I plead but one excuse  The jewel were a lesser joy in wearing  That cost a lesser agony to lose. I had not bid for beautifuller hours  Had I not found the door so near unsealed, Nor hoped, had you not filled my arms with flowers,  For that one flower that bloomed too far afield. If I have wept, it was because, forsaken,  I felt perhaps more poignantly than some The blank eternity from which we waken  And all the blank eternity to come. And I betrayed how sweet a thing and tender  (In the regret with which my lip was curled) Seemed in its tragic, momentary splendor  My transit through the beauty of the world.
Let the band play Dixie. And let the Rebel Yell resound. Let daughters of the Confederacy Be proud that once more virginal loveliness Even in dingy courtrooms Receives the homage of the poets. Let us rush to Stone Mountain Uncover our heads, stand speechless before Granite embodiments of our knighthood Unfinished but everlasting, &ldquo;And truth and honor established here, forever.&rdquo; Lo! Stonewall, preux chevalier, And Lee, majestic Arthur, facing East. Behind them, to the West Scottsboro, Decatur. Eight cowering Negroes in a jail Waiting for the justice Chivalry as ever extends to them, Still receiving the benefactions Of  Oh, let us be proud. Oh, let us, undefeated, raise again The Rebel Yell.
of my soul a street is: prettinesses Pic- abian tricktrickclickflick-er garnished of stark Picasso throttling trees hither my soul repairs herself with prisms of sharp mind and Matisse rhythms to juggle Kandinsky gold-fish away from the gripping gigantic muscles of C&eacute;zanne's logic, oho. a street there is where strange birdspurr
SEND FOR THE PIED PIPER AND LET HIM PIPE THE RATS AWAY. SEND FOR ROBIN HOOD TO CLINCH THE ANTI-POVERTY CAMPAIGN. SEND FOR THE FAIRY QUEEN WITH A WAVE OF THE WAND TO MAKE US ALL INTO PRINCES AND PRINCESSES. SEND FOR KING ARTHUR TO BRING THE HOLY GRAIL. SEND FOR OLD MAN MOSES TO LAY DOWN THE LAW. SEND FOR JESUS TO PREACH THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT. SEND FOR DREYFUS TO CRY, &ldquo; SEND FOR DEAD BLIND LEMON TO SING THE B FLAT BLUES.  SEND FOR ROBESPIERRE TO SCREAM, &ldquo; SEND (GOD FORBID HE'S NOT DEAD LONG ENOUGH!) FOR LUMUMBA TO CRY &ldquo;FREEDOM NOW!&rdquo;  SEND FOR LAFAYETTE AND TELL HIM, &ldquo;HELP! HELP ME!&rdquo; SEND FOR DENMARK VESEY CRYING, &ldquo;FREE!&rdquo;  FOR CINQUE SAYING, &ldquo;RUN A NEW FLAG UP THE MAST.&rdquo;  FOR OLD JOHN BROWN WHO KNEW SLAVERY COULDN'T LAST. SEND FOR LENIN! (DON'T YOU DARE! HE CAN'T COME HERE!) SEND FOR TROTSKY! (WHAT? DON'T CONFUSE THE ISSUE, PLEASE!)  SEND FOR UNCLE TOM ON HIS MIGHTY KNEES. SEND FOR LINCOLN, SEND FOR GRANT. SEND FOR FREDERICK DOUGLASS, GARRISON, BEECHER, LOWELL.  SEND FOR HARRIET TUBMAN, OLD SOJOURNER TRUTH. SEND FOR MARCUS GARVEY (WHAT?) SUFI (WHO?) FATHER DIVINE (WHERE?)  DUBOIS (WHEN?) MALCOLM (OH!) SEND FOR STOKELY. (NO?) THEN  SEND FOR ADAM POWELL ON A NON-SUBPOENA DAY.  SEND FOR THE PIED PIPER TO PIPE OUR RATS AWAY. (And if nobody comes, send for me.)
These cold nights I catch it all clearly  The terrace, its front rooms unlit And kept only for coffins, the streetlamp Grown cloudy with breath, where the children swing, And the footprint set down in fresh snow On a doorstep, as if by a template, still perfect. A lightship intones that it too is a place, Where the salt meets the fresh And the tide in the estuary pauses Before setting out with the fleet, While the trawlermen sprint from their taxis, Still dressed up, still drunk and still broke. Then there are white shores receding And gone, with the last light still ghosting the eye As the snow comes again and the complement Enters the atlas you gave me, a place Made of names which are cold and exciting to say In the intimate arctic of almost-asleep. I'm not meant to be out. I am catching my death, But the first thing I want is a story. Tonight I can live with the fact That high in the darkness a crane waits To build the infirmary you'll die in. Tonight is reserved. I can always go back To the moment I entered the world To imagine its distance myself: While the dead in the house with their teacups Complain that the door is left open, I'll wait With the snow and the sirens, as long as it takes.
These wings of clear flame (like dying fires, Like vanishing wakes, The lost light Down there the river? grotesque, ... Florence: a vortex, a mouth, Vertiginous hive ... Florence, verticillate throat, A hiss of enfolding wings, The tortuous river enflamed, The water like scales in the fire's flare ... The fire's wings, the cries, The long wakes of ever-diminishing light; Below, grotesque and wide, the river Flashes and burns like a snake; The sudden faces of thieves, their laughter; I stand, on San Miniato's steps, Between two cypress, two wicks, Two guttered and useless flames ...
Jesu, thy love within me is so main, And my poor heart so narrow of content, That with thy love my heart wellnigh is rent, And yet I love to bear such loving pain. O take thy Cross and nails and therewith strain My heart's desire unto his full extent, That thy dear love may not therein be pent, But thoughts may have free scope thy love to explain. O now my heart more paineth than before, Because it can receive and hath no more, O fill this emptiness or else I die, Now stretch my heart again and now supply, Now I want space, now grace. To end this smart, Since my heart holds not thee, hold thou my heart.
We move to the hill station, for our friends are kind enough to know that a foreigner cannot bear the hell of heat and dust that's routine to them. We clear the air, find mountain paths to stroll, and each day see tombs that could well be in Sussex or some Yorkshire churchyard. One yellow temple complete with pediment looks good enough to live in, with terraced slopes below and winding path, red blossoms like birds' nests in trees, Himalayas behind. Moss grows thick enough to trickle over slopes, rain green. Bronze plaque tells names. Neighbors have obelisks or angels. Great pines lean, sough music in wind. I can almost see this couple as they rounded the bend, a hundred years past. He was a soldier, wounded while fighting Bengalis, and she was the English nurse who loved him. Her eyes were great brown orbs like yours, and her touch tender. She stopped each morning beside that path to pluck a red hibiscus for her hair. Then they continued on around the curve we walk today, he with his cane like mine but needing it more, she with her hand at his elbow. A hundred years ago their love was gossip of this hill station, hospital wards of the Raj. They felt no need to pick out their tomb, little temple. Sharp perfumed air and blue iris loud as glorious ghazal tell me they were here. He could look in her eyes and see England.
In a patch of baked earth At the crumbled cliff's brink, Where the parching of August Has cracked a long chink, Against the blue void Of still sea and sky Stands single a thistle, Tall, tarnished, and dry. Frayed leaves, spotted brown, Head hoary and torn, Was ever a weed Upon earth so forlorn, So solemnly gazed on By the sun in his sheen That prints in long shadow Its raggedness lean? From the sky comes no laughter, From earth not a moan. Erect stands the thistle, Its seeds abroad blown.
The Principal's other edition of Q, Scott by the truckload, and Fredegond Shove, Manuals instructing the dead how to do What they no longer can with the Torments of Love Mistaken assumptions concerning The Race, Twelve-volume memoirs of footling campaigns, Discredited physics, the Criminal Face, Confessions of clerics who blew out their brains, Laws and Geographies (utterly changed), Travellers' journals that led up the creek, The verbose, the inept and the clearly deranged, The languages no one has bothered to speak, And journals of subjects that do not exist: What better excuse to go out and get pissed? Here is the body of knowledge at rest In its cavernous basement of headachy light. Here lie the unread who were boring at best, And guarding the door is their acolyte, Grim Miss McNair with her own magazine, Which is not the extinct  But her sister's new copy of  From which she looks up to forbid you to speak. She means it. Their case is officially shut. Their posthumous function is solely to warn, <> That they, like their authors, should not have been born, And hers to ensure, with her book-burner's glare, That no one will add to what's already there.
Nor was, ever, but by that instant, That tippage of time, When all goes over. The screech owl, Dead in the wimpled grass, His underwing wakened with russet, Edged in beige, He knew it. There was only that instant, Always, And all went, Irrevocable, Was done, The act soughing out its eternity of flaw and conjunction, And the sigh: Nevermore. He did not hear it, but we do. We are that sigh. Going out, going over, Trailing our hands in the backwash of time, Where the leaf floats, The leaf and the fallen stem, Wheatseed, Kernel of oat, Bearded barley. Where the wave cries to the rock, We trail our hands there, We are that sigh. The screech owl, Stiff in the wimpled grass, Broke like a beak into something other. When did it die? What instant, split with convergence? Of that instant and in it What could death be? In the pure contingence What transformation? The eye lidded over, The claw crooked at the sky, The loose feather in the lank grass. For it: all.
Look for my fingerprints. Good luck to you. I wore no gloves when I burgled your house and made off with as much as I could carry, a precious little. Now I give myself up, what's in it for you? All yours, little as you knew or stared or dreamt, the night I stole in my stockinged face and feet, shit-scared you'd wake and catch me, when I whipped your skinny wallet, your ten-dollar watch, pearls of more pearliness than price. You missed them, did you? All losses are loss, life itself the most trifling some experts testify. Hardly less precious, then, to get your own back now, a little, a little the worse for wear, a restitution. It's that, or nothing.
A bearded man seated on a camp-stool  &ldquo;The geologist. 1910.&rdquo; &ldquo;Staying with friends&rdquo; a boy in a straw hat, on a porch, surrounded with wisteria. &ldquo;Noontime&rdquo; a view of the Battery with masts passing over the rooftops. Then the old horse-cars on Broadway, people standing around in the garment district. A high view of Manhattan, light-shelves with sweeps of shadow. &ldquo;Jumpers&rdquo; as they come plunging down their hair bursts into fire. Then there are photographs of a door knob, a chair, an unstrung tennis racket. &ldquo;Still life. Yes, for a while. It gives your ideas a connection. And a beautiful woman yawning with the back of her hand, like this.&rdquo;
It is portentous, and a thing of state That here at midnight, in our little town A mourning figure walks, and will not rest, Near the old court-house pacing up and down, Or by his homestead, or in shadowed yards He lingers where his children used to play, Or through the market, on the well-worn stones He stalks until the dawn-stars burn away. A bronzed, lank man! His suit of ancient black, A famous high top-hat and plain worn shawl Make him the quaint great figure that men love, The prairie-lawyer, master of us all. He cannot sleep upon his hillside now. He is among us: as in times before! And we who toss and lie awake for long Breathe deep, and start, to see him pass the door. His head is bowed. He thinks on men and kings. Yea, when the sick world cries, how can he sleep? Too many peasants fight, they know not why, Too many homesteads in black terror weep. The sins of all the war-lords burn his heart. He sees the dreadnaughts scouring every main. He carries on his shawl-wrapped shoulders now The bitterness, the folly and the pain. He cannot rest until a spirit-dawn Shall come; the shining hope of Europe free: The league of sober folk, the Workers' Earth, Bringing long peace to Cornland, Alp and Sea. It breaks his heart that kings must murder still, That all his hours of travail here for men Seem yet in vain. And who will bring white peace That he may sleep upon his hill again?
Not in the cities, not among fabricated towers, Not on the superhighways has the land been matched. Beside the mountains, man's invention cowers. And in a country various and wild and beautiful How cheap the new car and the lighted movie look. We have been hourly aware of a failure to live, Monotonous poverty of spirit and the lack of love. But here among hills bare and desert-red, A violent precipice, a dizzy white curve falls Hundreds of feet through rock to the deep canyon-bed; A beauty sheer and clean and without error, It stands with the created sapphire lake behind it, It stands, a work of man as noble as the hills, And it is faith as well as water that it spills. Not built on terror like the empty pyramid, Not built to conquer but to illuminate a world: It is the human answer to a human need, Power in absolute control, freed as a gift, A pure creative act, God when the world was born! It proves that we have built for life and built for love And when we all are dead, this dam will stand and give.
My mother scratched the soles of my shoes to stop me slipping when I went away to school. I didn't think a few scratches with a pair of scissors was going to be enough. I was walking on ice, my arms stretched out. I didn't know where I was going. Her scratches soon disappeared when I started sliding down those polished corridors. I slid into class. I slid across the hall into the changing-room. I never slipped up. I learnt how to skate along with an aeroplane or a car, looking ordinary, pretending to have fun. I learnt how long a run I needed to carry me as far as the gym in time for Absences. I turned as I went, my arms stretched out to catch the door jamb as I went flying past.
We have walked, looking at the actual trees: The chestnut leaves wide-open like a hand, The beech leaves bronzing under every breeze, We have felt flowing through our knees As if we were the wind. We have sat silent when two horses came, Jangling their harness, to mow the long grass. We have sat long and never found a name For this suspension in the heart of flame That does not pass. We have said nothing; we have parted often, Not looking back, as if departure took An absolute of will once not again (But this is each day's feat, as when The heart first shook). Where fervor opens every instant so, There is no instant that is not a curve, And we are always coming as we go; We lean toward the meeting that will show Love's very nerve. And so exposed (O leaves before the wind!) We bear this flowing fire, forever free, And learn through devious paths to find The whole, the center, and perhaps unbind The mystery Where there are no roots, only fervent leaves, Nourished on meditations and the air, Where all that comes is also all that leaves, And every hope compassionately lives Close to despair.
Here I comes With me bucket of bums Isn't it a lovely day? I live in the slums With a posh set of drums That I never have time to play I've got double-jointed thumbs And receding gums But otherwise I'm OK And when I meet my chums Walking out with their mums this is what I always say  Here I comes With me bucket of bums Isn't it a lovely day?
How can I praise what is not painted with The first five colours? That winged horse of myth Seems now a circus horse, paid to be clever: The ride from Bethphage will last for ever. One man may count, with imitative hooves, The huge, high landcape that another loves, Empound the apocalypse, till truth is pent To satisfy the turnstiles of a tent. Vast libraries vault their dead, but I can trust White dust to resurrect the moving dust, White dust of donkeys shedding dusty loads Where swallows' wings paint Zechariah's words. Swift, chattering swallows, flying in cloisters cool, See through their darting eyes the imprisoned school, Cramped, figured scribes, distorted by possession: The upright man is always out of fashion. Swallows come back to their first house of mud Knowing no wider rainbow can be made; And that first nest eclipsing heaven, that roof, May find its image in an ass's hoof. For when the garments and tree-branches strawed The way, a child into the mountain strayed And on the mountain-path, in heaven's eclipse, He found a swallow's wings, an ass's steps. And time stopped still, stopped when an ass went down Slowly from Bethphage to that still town. That ass, that swallow, through the window's gap Meet in his eyes who wears the mockers' cap. Born of that mud, innocent light he sees, The cornerstone in crumbling masonries. His washed eyes, marvelling, resurrect the mountain Where love's five colours leap into light's fountain.
The stubby black-jowled dog inside me growls and drools and warns and plants its crooked feet, legs quivering, brindle chest staunched, and howls until approachers back off in defeat, although a brilliant poacher sometimes cows my dog, my heart, its bitten hope, with meat, flung viscera my tamed dog mauls and then protects, well guarding what I eat while poacher raises rifle: he follows my deer into my wood, calling me dear, fleet beauty, and I run, wholly my wild soul, while the dumb, bristled dog I too am prowls, guarding empty gate and empty street till hunter becomes me, and we repeat.
Patron of pawn shops, Sloppily dressed, Bearded, shoeless and graceless, Reading when you should be working, Fingering a poem in your mind When you should be figuring a profit, Convert to outlandish religions, Zen, Ba'hai and Atheism, Consorter with Negroes and Jews And other troublesome elements Who are always disturbing the peace About something or other, Friend of revolutionaries And foe of the established order, When will you slough off This preposterous posture And behave like a normal Solid responsible White Anglo Saxon Protestant?
Every day became a slow July. Sweat, it was clear, was what he would do forever. He learned early women weren't waiting in barns when the workday ended. It would be wife and children, not much love and no money, no sun but the one he must labor under, That's how I saw him, bitter far back in himself. What did he dream? I dreamed him drunk and alone. And I dreamed another man younger than him and strong poking fun when the old one fell in the dirt. I dreamed he dreamed a hundred bluegill day at a lake and a cooling wind low in the oak. When my dream grew firm wild dogs pulled him from my sleep. You think you've got it? Forget it. That young strong man I dreamed was not me. The old man had more than one day of fun. Some good weather repeats. He was more proud than my dream credits him and he was less sad than whiskey might make him seem. Besides, when old no matter how sharp you may limp in some child's crippled eye. Lake and slow rivers were home for women with fins. I've gone back to white creeks with Indian names, the first promise life makes: it's all downhill and dance. This time I know better. I can center on the song. I never dance. Just listen to the band. The old man sits home caked with day labor and worn. Last night the young man called the old man a failure. The old man seemed phoney. He spoke ignorantly of what the young man knew well, and his weeping seemed fake. I begged, &lsquo;Leave him alone. I still love him. He's poor.&rsquo; The day moves loud in the leaves like a tremoring past, some form in the dust, a blinding sky on the way.
I am the city of two divided cities Where the eyes of rich and poor collide and wonder; Where the beggar's voice is low and unexpectant, And in clubs the feet of the servants are soft on the carpet And the world's wind scarcely stirs the leaves of  I am the reticent, the private city, The city of lovers hiding wrapped in shadows, The city of people sitting and talking quietly Beyond shut doors and walls as thick as a century, People who laugh too little and too loudly, Whose tears fall inward, flowing back to the heart. I am the city whose fog will fall like a finger gently Erasing the anger of angles, the strident indecorous gesture, Whose dusk will come like tact, like a change in the conversation, Violet and indigo, with strings of lemon streetlamps Casting their pools into the pools of rain As the notes of the piano are cast from the top-floor window Into the square that is always Sunday afternoon.
You touch the window, certainly it is there. You are having a very good time touching the window, imagining what is hiding behind. There, the regally garmented coquette cautiously drops by, feeling the window pane too, blind to your vigil. She is the good friend just arrived in the nick of time. What would you give for the right size rock? When wearing the window away with your nose, the window grows. Your lips are finally rocks, and the window keeps growing. She is just fine. She is just being crushed. She is just your kind of girl.
When the night is dead black and the pillow hard the question of one's longing shivers in the air. What can I answer it? What dare I whisper? The master of my bed is a polar bear of stone. Between us falls an avalanche of snow. <> <> The forest fires of summer are a ghostly grove. I lie all night beside the North Pole. Who did not love enough? Who will not forgive? Chill chamber! What a sleepless heart I hold toward the dying fire of all that I remember. <> <>
The room is silent except for the two hearth spirits. The fire speaks out of the grate like a kindly tongue. The man speaks out of the square screen like a god. The fire burns slowly, holding itself back from burning. The man speaks quickly, hurtling himself into particles. Hold up your hands to the fire, and they, too, are fires. Hold your hand up to the screen and feel the premises of illusion. Wherever you move, the fire pulls you close like a magnet. Wherever you look, the screen intercepts your escape. When the fire is worshipped, the resident cats will pray with you. When the screen presides, it lashes the dog with its scream. The fire has nothing to tell you; it waits for your thoughts. The screen has to tell you everything except what you are. In heaven, they will give you to fire to be consumed into freedom. In hell, they will play you over and over on the tape of your dead life. In hell, nothing you have done will be not watched.
I was high on tea in my fo'c'sle near the forepeak hatch listening to the stars envisioning the kamikazes flapping and turning in the soiled clouds ackack burst into fire a vast hole ripped out of the bow like a burning lily we dumped our oilcans of nitroglycerine among the waving octopi dull thud and boom of thunder undersea the cough of the tubercular ma- chinegunner flames in the hold among the cans of ether the roar of battleships far away rolling in the sea like whales surrounded by dying ants the screams the captain mad Suddenly a golden light came over the ocean and grew large the radiance entered the sky a deathly chill and heaviness entered my body I could scarce lift my eye and the ship grew sheathed in light like an overexposed photograph fading in the brain.
My twin sister Mary leans against a cage where little kinkajous are watching her with interest. Arboreal nocturnal sort of bears with a passion for your chocolate, I see. All I got was bits of chewing-gum  your &lsquo;sapodilla-gum-tree-juice-gum&rsquo;, chickle. Who took the photo anyway? You shouldn't let them when you look like that. &lsquo; Remember Louli, with her ear-muff hair? &lsquo;Tippy-toes, tippy-toes, tall as you can! Reach up to those forbidden chocolates, Mary!&rsquo; You were my elective mute, becoming almost elegant in time to Louli's elevating music ... It isn't good to watch small mammals by the hour, all hunched-up. Also, funny men go down there, Mummy said.
when rain whom fear not children but men speaks(among leaves Easily through voices womenlike telling of death love earth dark) and thousand thrusts squirms stars Trees,swift each with its Own motion deeply to wickedly comprehend the innocently Doomed brief all which somewhere is fragrantly, arrive (when Rain comes; predicating forever,assuming the laughter of afterwards  i spirally understand What touching means or What does a hand with your hair in my imagination
Respond float-ing soil heresy and the fog absorbs pink-quartz thrust-drift. Tractor churns heavy despotic bones: sheep anatomy undering edgy discs and salty furrows luminous night-work driver's red-neck hurts. Fencing wire coils snakes complex in gullies crops and wild radishes rot. Scour stalk-base and stubble vast rimmed fields charred in waves, ash-water lapping like gout: first rains float.
Three women at a table hold the world. One gets up to stir the stars, one makes the fire, another blows on it to keep it going; and still they have time for play, three women hunched over a cup, hands open in invitation as the table tilts in Rublev's icon, three angels with the same face. My mother is the tree trunk I climb, my grandmother's hands kneading bread make the table shake. Tell me the story of three hungry angels who appeared one day at Abraham's tent, to make Sarah work and laugh.
Hugh it was who told me, didn't tell me, Showed me, wouldn't let my hands on his Cowboys or Confederates, Hussars, Saxons, Romans, Japanese: &lsquo;This is where they go,&rsquo; he said, gasping Eight-year-old whom I remember then Looking like he probably does now he's Got a boy himself. I sat there, six. He stood them where they stand, huge forces, Squares and oblongs ranged along a gap, a No-man's table, polished, with a face Blinking off it, his, with his whole mouth a Fogging chocolate breath. &lsquo;Now,&rsquo; He breathed, &lsquo;for the big planes, they always start it.&rsquo; I didn't disagree but was amazed When start it was exactly what they did And finished it in twenty seconds. &lsquo;Hugh,&rsquo; I hazarded: &lsquo;that took an hour to do. But look at it all now.&rsquo; He did, nodding, picking out the blue Yankees from the silver-painted Danes. &lsquo;I'll let you have one go, if you're quite sure You've got the hang of it.&rsquo; I took the hour To set it up and of course he walked in Saying &lsquo;Wrong, wrong, wrong, Glen,&rsquo; But picking up his planes.
You hitched a thousand miles north from San Francisco Hiked up the mountainsidea mile in the air The little cabin one room  walled in glass Meadows and snowfields,hundreds of peaks. We lay in our sleeping bags talking half the night; Wind in the guy-cablessummer mountain rain. Next morning I went with you as far as the cliffs, Loaned you my poncho the rain across the shale  You down the snowfield flapping in the wind Waving a last goodbyehalf hidden in the clouds To go on hitching clear to New York; Me back to my mountainand far, far, west.
Great moment in  Batty is expiring, and talks about how everything he's seen will die with him  ships on fire off the shoulder of Orion sea-beams glittering before the Tannhauser gates. Memory is like molten gold burning its way through the skin It stops there. There is no transfer Nothing I have seen will be remembered beyond me That merciful cleaning of the windows of creation will be an excellent thing my interests notwithstanding. But then again I've never been near Orion, or the Tannhauser gates, I've only been here.
<> Hark! was that not his knock upon the door, Or, that his footstep on the casement floor? Ah, no, the clock rings out the hour, 'tis nine, 'Tis past his hour and dreary waiting's thine  Sad heart, he will not come to-night. With anxious eyes, the gloom I strive to pierce, The stars are hid and winds are howling fierce; Only the ticking of the clock I hear, No welcome footsteps greet my eager ear. 'Tis long since past his hour, vain waiting thine  Sad heart, he will not come to-night. From nature's fount the crystal tear drops flow, They soothe the throbbing heart's cry low, O, heart thine is the common, common fate, Thou yet must learn to hope and wait, 'Tis long since past his hour, vain waiting thine  Sad heart, he will not come to-night.
Mock up again, summer, the sooty altars Between the sweltering tides and the tin gardens, All the colours of the stained bow windows. Quick, she'll be dead on time, the single Actress shuffling red petals to this music, Percussive light! So many suns she harbours And keeps them jigging, her puppet suns, All over the dead hot calm impure Blood noon tide of the breathless bay. Are the victims always so beautiful? Pearls pluck at her, she has tossed her girls Breast-flowers for keepsakes now she is going For ever and astray. I see her feet Slip into the perfect fit the shallows make her Purposefully, sure as she is the sea Levels its lucent ruins underfoot That were sharp dead white shells, that will be sands, The shallows kiss like knives. Always for this They are chosen for their beauty. Wristiest slaughterman December smooths The temple bones and parts the grey-blown brows With humid fingers. It is an ageless wind That loves with knives, it knows our need, it flows Justly, simply as water greets the blood, And woody tumours burst in scarlet spray. An old man's blood spills bright as a girl's On beaches where the knees of light crash down. These dying ejaculate their bloom. Can anyone choose And call it beauty? The victims Are always beautiful.
what time is it i wonder never mind consider rather heavenly things and but the stars for instance everything is planned next to that patch of darkness there's a what is it oh yes chair but not Cassiopeia's might those be stockings dribbling from the table all which seemed sweet deep and inexplicable not being dollars toenails or ideas thoroughly's stolen(somewhere between our unlighted hearts lust lurks slovenly and homeless and when a kiss departs our lips are made of thing in beginning corners dawn smirks and there's the moon,thinner than a watchspring
Who in one lifetime sees all causes lost, Herself dismayed and helpless, cities down, Love made monotonous fear and the sad-faced Inexorable armies and the falling plane, Has sickness, sickness.Introspective and whole, She knows how several madnesses are born, Seeing the integrated never fighting well, The flesh too vulnerable, the eyes tear-torn. She finds a pre-surrender on all sides: Treaty before the war, ritual impatience turn The camps of ambush to chambers of imagery. She holds belief in the world, she stays and hides Life in her own defeat, stands, though her whole world burn, A childless goddess of fertility.
Heart, have no pity on this house of bone: Shake it with dancing, break it down with joy. No man holds mortgage on it; it is your own; To give, to sell at auction, to destroy. When you are blind no moonlight on the bed, When you are deaf to gravel on the pane, Shall quavering caution from this house instead Cluck forth at summer mischief in the lane? <> <> <> The Latin's vulgar, but the advice is sound. Youth, have no pity; leave no farthing here For age to invest in compromise and fear.
How it felt when we were walking before dark, not what I said in my head but how it was feeling all round us, the light, the infancy of weather so strong along the beautiful, the river. Looking up, catch it in the air for you, this little ball just about to fall behind a mountain. I am an egg. The house is guarded by the dead. Nobody comes through the pale blue door thronging and noisy. These are the fears I mean you to know, saying them is funny but you don't smile, I feel the grit of wool in my hands, a snail choked on cotton thread, a fly stuck to the sun.
don't cries to please my mustn't broke)life Is like that please stroke for now stroke answers(but now don't you're hurting o Me please you're killing)death is like now That please squirtnowing for o squirting we're replies(at which now O fear turned o Now handspring trans forming it self int o eighteen)Don't (for)Please(tnights,on whose for eheads shone eternal pleasedon't; rising:from the Shall.
O God of earth and altar,  Bow down and hear our cry, Our earthly rulers falter,  Our people drift and die; The walls of gold entomb us,  The swords of scorn divide, Take not thy thunder from us,  But take away our pride. From all that terror teaches,  From lies of tongue and pen, From all the easy speeches  That comfort cruel men, For sale and profanation  Of honour and the sword, From sleep and from damnation,  Deliver us, good Lord. Tie in a living tether  The prince and priest and thrall, Bind all our lives together,  Smite us and save us all; In ire and exultation  Aflame with faith, and free, Lift up a living nation,  A single sword to thee.
We have before us A magician's coffin Sawn in half With a girl in it A knuckle knocking on wood For its lips to be read A heap of sucked wish-bones Snoring on a plate A bridge Over nothing in particular A stone that thinks Itself a flower A period a careless dot After what sentence A void big enough For the universe To make its kennel in it A miner's lamp That sooner or later Will attract Its own bullet Hair and twenty nails That go on growing After its final And absolute extinction That is all I leave you with A door you don't wish to open A key you are afraid to possess A sound of jailer's boots A voice that wanted To equal the silence That surrounds it
set fire to the City, burn the City down start the fire in the top floor of the oldest building, bring in a suitcase to be sure you have the materials, watch your fingerprints and escape notice by mingling with the other occupants of the building when the cry is &lsquo;Fire&rsquo; from that fire in that one building the whole City will be burned it is required, &amp; you shall know, suddenly, how corrupt all relations are between fire departmentsbuilding ownersinsurance companiespolicepoliticiansand building inspectorsan impossible web of fact you cannot place your finger on to say where it begins or who is culpable and you will know this only after you have been landed on the top floor to set the fire, then you will have for the first time concern about your fingerprints and how you will get down out of there and that the corruption is true, organized and distributed throughout the system you set fire to the City, burn the City down
Imagine a road as straight as a wish, Bright as a ribbon of purest salt, Running endlessly over a marsh. This is the road that Huey built On a child's dream to Baton Rouge; And that, in the distance, a terrible smudge. Why do you shudder before you know That these are some vultures croaking  For a fat pig killed by a hurtling car?  A party of buzzards chomping sweet On a gaudy mess of good hog's meat, On the road, the road, the road that Huey built. Enamored, they barely lift in the air As the suave and sleek machine hums by, To settle again. But the stricken eye Must turn, must follow, follow the feast To the final dot, afraid of the worst: That this is beginning, middle, and last. Since the road that Huey built is as straight As a knife, or a string for garroting, Cruel and proud as a taloned foot, You riders upon the cursed roads, Route, or Via, or Autobahn, That would match the thrust of the will of God  What blood do you think is red in the sun? Road and bogswamp are one and one Claw is knife or the tightened thong. A certain man built a crooked road For the crooked toes of a wicked bird And the black blood of a rooting beast Over the empire of the frog. <> <>
After the lights and after the rumba and after the bourbon and after the beer and after the drums and after the samba and after the ice cream and not long after failure, loss, despair, and loss and despair <> and his polka doing the bumps with a hot guitar turning unique.Slow.Slow.Deprecating shoulder up. Hand up. All the fingers tall. Panache and rags and triumph and smile  beggar of light in ridiculous sunlight. All things human clumsy and fair as graceful as loving as stupid as true. And on this floor the dancers, in this square the little trees, and on this stage always the clown of our living gives us our sunlight and our incantation as sun does, laughing, shining, reciting dawn, noon, and down, making all delight and healing all ills like faraway words on jars, the labels in Protopapas' window: marshmallow, myrtle, peppermint, pumpkin, sesame, sesame, squills.
nothing false and possible is love (who's imagined,therefore limitless) love's to giving as to keeping's give; as yes is to if,love is to yes must's a schoolroom in the month of may: life's the deathboard where all now turns when (love's a universe beyond obey or command,reality or un-) proudly depths above why's first because (faith's last doubt and humbly heights below) kneeling, we true lovers pray that us will ourselves continue to outgrow all whose mosts if you have known and i've only we our least begin to guess
A month much like any other There were five weekends in it And no printing strike, but a rape In Vietnam (I believe it was), a Symbolical German dentist removing teeth And illusions, and a Jewish Italian Afflicted with accidie in an elegant style (Or maybe that was the month before) W. Pater wrote letters to an oriental maiden Raped by GIs, while a bored Italian Jew Discovered the source of eternal energy in The Antarctic (Prix des Libraires) which was Discovered a week later by a Swede in a Documentary novel and a balloon. A number of Quaint peasants murdered their husbands or Wives etc. and got off scot-free because they Were life-enhancing. And I forgot my name (It was found at the bottom of a page) I wrote elegant letters to an asian woman Murdered by the foreign soldiery. Shakespeare Turned up, with an apt word for everything Especially titles. I forgot my title (The postman brought me proofs of existence) Much drinking of  Remember a hangover. And lots of sex In a lost world at the bottom of the Antarctic Discovered by E. Pound, an American balloonist And I lost my memory for several days, but Found it at the bottom of a cheque. In a Spare hour I tried to write a poem on life and Death in a Vietnamese hamlet called SW18 Ravaged by peace and the brutal schoolchildren W. Pater came about the cooker At some stage an exhaustive life of E. Pound Appeared. A peasant named Confucius was raped By the brutal intelligentsia. A large man came About the rates, a book came about the rapes, a Large book came about Shakespeare from Voltaire To Ungaretti. An index slipped, trouble with An appendix, my teeth hurt. At one point (I am Almost sure) a book reviewer died at his desk Whose name will be found at the bottom
Given those leaves why should I complain That is not Macchu Picchu to my left Under my feet the trees deposit lives at last in color not dividing into class or coronation of any kind The slave lives in my mouth White gates to the dark throat of my name at fifty miles an hour I visualize a profile leading to another language I am cowardly to understand A woman my age lying down at the top of the outdoor stairs delivers her vote her face to the stone of voice and makes the awkward leadership swerve resolute around her fallen body In my room the boy stammering they promised me a job they promised me they do not hear the edge to the stutter the gun under stultimultistultifying failures of the scream I prophesy the same unto the same an imagery to overflow the frame beyond the tombstone straight ahead beyond the monologue of living normal with the dead
I choose back lanes for the pace they will impose,  An old perspective half forgotten Surprising me now as the world slows With these things the broad road lacked:  Carboys of vitriol stacked in a garage, Orange hooks of honeysuckle gripping a wall. Here a church window becomes an arch of light  And the pitching of a hymn a brief Infusion of the air. Voices, and low Indistinguishable words, the organ's bass  The foundation for a ritual I trespass in, that suddenly Intensifies the day. On the other side  I picture them: the ranked devout Pulling the ribbons from the black prayerbooks And each with his or her accustomed doubt  Submitting to a poetry Triumphant as the church's muscular brass. Thus Sunday morning: a gleaning  Of its strange wisdoms. The certainty Of hymns comes with me through a different town Of derelict courts and gardens, a stable  Where a vizored man beats sparks from a wheel, An old man splitting marble in a mason's yard, The creamy splinters falling into my mind  Like the heavy fragments of hymns, Then walking on, much further, this morning being Sunday.
Held at the mercy of the drummer the ordinary skin begins to gasp until the room is panting with their hips, bones, tossed hair, scarves, lapels. Made thirty years ago, a masterpiece of lyrical ennui, the irony of effort, the song of doors. Jacques Tati's  Paris, without the city. Children of Paradise without the nuisances of plot. In color. We see the colors of time, in fact, like the spectacular sunrise, color of buses and exhausted makeup and a man like every other man disappears somehow on a not very busy street, among all his sauntering kindred, vivid, interesting, tiresome, adorable, lost. Watching the slow semantic antics of each gesture they make, these sad lost lovely Frenchmen, I think from time to time of John's phonecall this afternoon. He said: &ldquo;James Merrill died today.&rdquo; (Pause.) &ldquo;But he died suddenly.&rdquo; Could it be he hardly noticed it? Long tracking shot. You look away for a minute and the man in the raincoat is gone.
infinite jukethrob smoke &amp; swallow to dis gorge) a sulky gob with entirely white eyes of elsewhere jabber while(infinite fog &amp; puking jukepulse hug)large less than more magnetic pink unwhores a wai ter lugs his copious whichwhat skilfully here &amp;(simply infinite)there &amp; (smoke)a fair y socked flopslump(&amp; juke)ing shrieks Yew May n't Dew Thiz Tew Mee as somebody's almost moth et folds(but infinite)gently up the with a carroty youth blonde whis(gorgedis reswal lowing spewnonspew clutch)pets again &amp; again (jukejog mist &amp; strict) &amp; again (ly infin) It's Snowing Isn't That Perfectly Wonderful
Salmon in the river blur like dreams, then reappear to break the surface with disturbances healing at the speed of light. We watch, intent, blind to the clouds and leaves swimming the wind. By chance I watched a forked twig running at the speed of water pass over the falls and the falls freeze into focus: A salmon springs from froth solid as snow. Each scale is clear and our universe, inverted in that eye, shines as far and brilliant as the moon. You are there and I am there, all of this, caught forever in the alien lens of an eye staring from the face assumed by water. Seen and gone.
Considering that before you died You had brought down some nineteen planes, I think that you were satisfied, And life at last seemed worth the pains. &lsquo;I have had more happiness in one year Than in all other years&rsquo; you said; And battle joy may be so dear A memory even to the dead It chases common thought away. Yet rise from your Italian tomb, Flit to Kiltartan cross and stay Till certain second thoughts have come Upon the cause you served, that we Imagined such a fine affair: Half-drunk or whole mad soldiery Are murdering your tenants there; Men that revere your father yet Are shot at on the open plain; Where can new-married women sit To suckle children now? Armed men May murder them in passing by Nor parliament, nor law take heed;  Then stop your ears with dust and lie Among the other cheated dead.
It is the fashion now to wave aside As tedious, obvious, vacuous, trivial, trite, All things which do not tickle, tease, excite To some subversion, or in verbiage hide Intent, or mock, or with hot sauce provide A dish to prick the thickened appetite; Straightforwardness is wrong, evasion right; It is correct,  What fumy wits these modern wags expose, For all their versatility: Voltaire, Who wore to bed a night-cap, and would close, In fear of drafts, all windows, could declare In antique stuffiness, a phrase that blows Still through men's smoky minds, and clears the air.
Since you did depart Out of my reach, my darling, Into the hidden, I see each shadow start With recognition, and I Am wonder-ridden. I am dazed with the farewell But I scarcely feel your loss. You left me a gift Of tongues, so the shadows tell Me things, and the silences toss Me their drift. You sent me a cloven fire Out of death, and it burns in the draught Of the breathing hosts, Kindles the darkening pyre Of the mournful, till people waft Like candid ghosts. Form after form, in the streets Waves like a ghost along Kindled to me; The star above the house-tops greets Me every eve with a long Song fierily. And all day long, the town Glimmers with subtle ghosts Going up and down In the common, prison-like dress, Yet their daunted looking flickers To me, that I answer Yes! So I am not lonely nor sad Although bereaved of you, My love. I move among a townfolk clad With words, but the night shows through Their words as they move.
We to your story, game and smugness, do add This death, our death. We to the clown commit The glory given us; we to the further, after-breath Of fame declare our dividend of fire, our mite Of trampled ash. We to that cavernous place You call &ldquo;our time,&rdquo; commend an anger charged To rip the face of worlds so simply snuggling in Above our rotted heads; we to the wily saviors Send warning, sound a war's depth That shall be a stop to their stuttering guns, That shall be a sound which no battle's strut can scare. We were your only decent war; we were answer, aim. We were that rooted story, Man's game. We to your bare lands Lend prestige, dead. We to others' sons spell glory.
I threw my line out, Baited with desire, In the sea of space (Where deeper is higher) I cast my sinker out Deep in the sky For my hook to catch on A  The twine of my thinking Sank down deep Where Andromeda And Orion sweep; Where the constellations Swirl in shoals, Swarming instinctive To far-off goals; Where the Milky Way And the Dipper's Seven Swim down under In the sea of Heaven. So my reel of science, Humming and singing, Played my line out And sent it flinging; Till my hook pulled tight And I wondered &ldquo;Can it Be tangled in a sun Or a wheeling planet?&rdquo; Till before I knew it, My line was caught; My line was quivering,  My string of thought, With hook and sinker, Now jerked taut  Snapped off quickly And broke my rod, Trying to capture God!
They made a plaster cast of my corpse took wax moulds of my genitals and anus, my famous anomalous buttocks till the last sigh in me left my body. I made a noise I never heard before when the man with the glinting knife whispered &lsquo;posterity&rsquo; and dissected my brain. Not so long ago people paid handsomely to see my rump, my apron, my non-European genitals. Two shillings. I paced my cage, backwards, an orang outang, forwards, a beast on a chain. Men said the size of my lips were unnatural. You can see the moulds of my genitals at the Mus&eacute;e de l'Homme Paris; the rest of me is here now, Natural History Museum, my brains, my woolly hair, my skeleton. Some things I will never forget no matter how I am divided up: the look on a white lady's face when she poked her parasol into my privates. Her gloved hands. Her small stone eyes. Her English squeal of surprise at my size. My sigh is black. My heart is black. My walk is black. My hide, my flanks. My secret. My brain is the size of a black woman's brain. When the gentleman prodded me with his cane, he wanted to discover black tears falling from my dark eyes. I tell no lies. Then he called my tears crocodile tears. What did he call my lips? Rubber? Blubber? My country is a dream now. Or maybe it did not exist. When they called me in, three men in suits, They asked me in my own bush tongue if I wanted to be exhibited in this fashion. I said the English words I'd heard them say often. Money. Freedom. My Boer keeper smiled. He could still walk me, dance me hold his stick to me. He promised me riches. Bring in the literati, the artists, the famous. Let them view the buttocks of the Hottentot Venus. My heart inside my cage pounded like a single drum. For eleven hours a day people came to see Saartjie Baartman. I heard their laughter like money shaking in a tin. On the wall I was framed: ugly, deformed, a cartoon. I was wearing a thin skin coloured dress. Hottentot Venus. Don't miss the Hottentot. Now, what name have I got? Sarah Bateman. Like an English woman. A great actress.
<>  Would fall into musing and drop his tools; Brother Bartholomew cared for rhyme  More than for theses of the schools; And sighed, and took up his burden so, Vowed to the Muses, for weal or woe. At matins he sat, the book on his knees,  But his thoughts were wandering far away; And chanted the evening litanies  Watching the roseate skies grow gray, Watching the brightening starry host Flame like the tongues at Pentecost. &ldquo;A foolish dreamer, and nothing more;  The idlest fellow a cell could hold;&rdquo; So murmured the worthy Isidor,  Prior of ancient Nithiswold; Yet pitiful, with dispraise content, Signed never the culprit's banishment. Meanwhile Bartholomew went his way  And patiently wrote in his sunny cell; His pen fast travelled from day to day;  His books were covered, the walls as well. &ldquo;But O for the monk that I miss, instead Of this listless rhymer!&rdquo; the Prior said. Bartholomew dying, as mortals must,  Not unbelov'd of the cowl&egrave;d throng, Thereafter, they took from the dark and dust  Of shelves and of corners, many a song That cried loud, loud to the farthest day, How a bard had arisen, and passed away. Wonderful verses! fair and fine,  Rich in the old Greek loveliness; The seer-like vision, half divine;  Pathos and merriment in excess. And every perfect stanza told Of love and of labor manifold. The King came out and stood beside  Bartholomew's taper-lighted bier, And turning to his lords, he sighed:  &ldquo;How worn and wearied doth he appear,  Our noble poet, now he is dead!&rdquo; &ldquo;O tireless worker!&rdquo; the Prior said.
Let's hand it to the Elbow People. Theirs Is to stand unexcited on the stairs Glancing across the camera at what? A camera that's not there or is but not Taking them: The Elbow Camera. You don't smile for the Elbow Camera. You can't take anything away from Hatgirl. It's all been taken by the usual uncle. Get too close, her body starts to slim Until it's what it was when she knew him. Her eyes are sandy with her teddy-bears When Elbow Husband nudges her upstairs. You might recall the Honourable Member For where we were, one of a growing number Dead each time we're back from a long lunch Then spotted rising from an empty bench Delighted! Elbow People will remind him Gently if they find him and they find him. Rats and That come every night in coaches Eating as they sing and sporting watches Promised them. They're only miles away When without fail the Elbow Motorway Slings them home digesting to the sewers To work as Elbow Listeners, Elbow Viewers. Yet it's no secret all of us derive From Ankle Ancestors who when alive Looked different from the way you'd care to now. But then in photos all the same somehow. Like this one, this stiff grouping at a Ball: Idiots, elbows of no use at all. Now Elbow People clip into their cars, Explaining you can't judge that time by ours, Though as the window sinks they lean and say <> Conferring as the window glints and climbs. We were a picture, slanted in the frames. Hand it to the Elbow People then. Surprisingly approachable young men, Lifting drinks and listening with a smile Then tapping your ideas into a file That had, you notice, got them anyway. Down the hatch. Today is Elbow Day.
In my dream, long dead, he stood in front of me before an open door; head high and confident, looking as he used to when about to leave on a business trip. And, indeed, he had his hat and coat on and held a valise. At the moment I was as fond of him as I used to be when a boy; and I called out, &ldquo;Uncle, uncle!&rdquo; But he paid no heed to me and was going away. Through the open door I could look into other rooms with open doors that led into other rooms  all with open doors.
It is not I but my younger daughter Props up the likeness of you I brought her Back from your death and the turning-out Of your memory hoard. What a sad disquiet Of uncles and aunts and distant cousins And me looking sulky on odd occasions That was. And the stabbing sight of your hand So firmly chronicling &lsquo;Margate&rsquo; and &lsquo;Twenty-something&rsquo; (those timeless summers) And &lsquo;Blanche&rsquo; on the back of Mrs. Chalmers. A lot got chucked. &lsquo;These magpie women&rsquo; My father grunted, and perhaps for him in Those desolate days such ruthless weeding Of all that photographic inbreeding Was just as well made moving lighter And your image, cleared of much moss, seem brighter. &lsquo;Take what you like.&rsquo; Of the ones I chose I've surrendered this calm Victorian pose, Innocent-seeming, unbelievably good (With all that fidgeting under the hood And &lsquo;A little this way, miss, if you please&rsquo; You must have scowled). Now you sit at ease Among her jars of cosmetical things And travel trophies; and whose belongings Are whose and the claims of the generations Needs sharing, and love, and endless patience.
The winds of hatred blow Cold, cold across the flesh And chill the anxious heart; Intricate phobias grow From each malignant wish To spoil collective life. Now each man stands apart. We watch opinion drift, Think of our separate skins. On well-upholstered bums The generals cough and shift Playing with painted pins. The arbitrators wait; The newsmen suck their thumbs. The mind is quick to turn Away from simple faith To the cant and fury of Fools who will never learn; Reason embraces death, While out of frightened eyes Still stares the wish to love.
<> But there's nothing there now but minnows; they say it is all fished out. I fished there many a Summer day some twenty years ago, And I never quit without getting a mess of a dozen or so. There was a man, Dave Lilly, who lived on the North Adams road, And he spent all his time fishing, while his neighbors reaped and sowed. He was the luckiest fisherman in the Berkshire hills, I think. And when he didn't go fishing he'd sit in the tavern and drink. Well, Dave is dead and buried and nobody cares very much; They have no use in Greylock for drunkards and loafers and such. But I always liked Dave Lilly, he was pleasant as you could wish; He was shiftless and good-for-nothing, but he certainly could fish. The other night I was walking up the hill from Williamstown And I came to the brook I mentioned, and I stopped on the bridge and sat down. I looked at the blackened water with its little flecks of white And I heard it ripple and whisper in the still of the Summer night. And after I'd been there a minute it seemed to me I could feel The presence of someone near me, and I heard the hum of a reel. And the water was churned and broken, and something was brought to land By a twist and flirt of a shadowy rod in a deft and shadowy hand. I scrambled down to the brookside and hunted all about; There wasn't a sign of a fisherman; there wasn't a sign of a trout. But I heard somebody chuckle behind the hollow oak And I got a whiff of tobacco like Lilly used to smoke. It's fifteen years, they tell me, since anyone fished that brook; And there's nothing in it but minnows that nibble the bait off your hook. But before the sun has risen and after the moon has set I know that it's full of ghostly trout for Lilly's ghost to get. I guess I'll go to the tavern and get a bottle of rye And leave it down by the hollow oak, where Lilly's ghost went by. I meant to go up on the hillside and try to find his grave And put some flowers on it but this will be better for Dave.
The boating party Started at dawn from Clart&eacute;. Lightly lightly they stepped into the green boat (The Lady Marion has left behind her golden coat). Marion d'Arcy and Charley Dake Were the only ones. He rowed her upon the lake. He rowed her across the lake until the green shallows Paled in a waxen lily litter striped with swallows. And now the morning sun flecks the dark trees And lightly the mauve sedge moves in a little breeze. Charley Dake loves the ducal girl But her eyelids flick flick upon his thoughts' whirl. Oh my ducal girl, cries Charley in a fit Of love-spasm. He is Cupid-hit. But the Lady Marion smiles and smiles And so they go again upon the watery miles. &lsquo;Oh Charley, Charley, do not go upon the water&rsquo; Cries a friendly swan, &lsquo;with the Duke's daughter. You wish to marry er, my boy-carrier? you can not support er Oh do not go with the Duke's daughter.&rsquo; There is an island in the lake, old brick walled, Where the laurestina climbs and is not spoiled. What man will spoil the brick walls of their yellow brim? Such a one as is nervy bold and grim. (Such a one, says the swan, as has something in store for him.) Flick flick the eyelids of the lady mark Where a dark angel flies across her father's park. All the green grass shivers in a warning, Flee, Charley, flee the magic morning. But Charley is folly-blind to the visitation Of the dark angel of consternation. Boldly he plucks a golden cup Throws it in Marion's lap and does not look up. Ah then the thunder peals and the waters bound For who took the flower, the angel says, must be drowned. So up rears the lake water and drags him underneath Where in suffering he draws his last breath. &lsquo;Never more&rsquo;, cries the swan, &lsquo;shall Charley be seen, He is underneath the waters of the mis en sc&egrave;ne&rsquo;. (And &lsquo;Charley, Charley, Charley&rsquo; cry the swan-instructed  curlews Ever after as they fly to their nests in the purlieus.) But the ducal girl comes safe to land and takes her coat, And goes off in the likeness of a slim stoat.
The old houses of Flanders, They watch by the high cathedrals; They have eyes, mourful, tolerant and sardonic, for the ways of men, In the high, white, tiled gables. The rain and the night have settled down on Flanders; It is all wet darkness; you can see nothing. Then those old eyes, mournful, tolerant and sardonic, Look at great, sudden, red lights, Look upon the shades of the cathedral And the golden rods of the illuminated rain, For a second.... And those old eyes, Very old eyes that have watched the ways of men for generations, Close for ever. The high white shoulders of the gables Slouch together for a consultation, Slant drunkenly over in the lea of the flaming cathedrals. They are no more, the old houses of Flanders.
As a Buddhist tried for months to visualize a small gold Bodhissatva on the air, I benignly conjure up this couple, his arms about her, free of trouble. They're young and smiling, apple clean, whose embraces gave my shining hair, and she is both his piano and his cello, which are played with fingers, light arpeggios now and then, rough gutsy rubbing of the belly when it's night and how well I know, in cold December, the poor lived better, in glowing embers of their kindling crates, than we did wrapped in our clawed-up gramma's quilts. In the decades later they still obsess us so that daily we forgive them and daily don't, and in a field may find them still, blue in paired flowers, their love transposed and borne beyond a billion rocks, and time, or caught within a cave by those who knew them before us, suffering sister, who wept in the Oklahoma night. Their best and worst I sing, no longer hate. And I smile to see my mother still, cradling the steaming soup, straight down the hill, to the wretched poor who huddled there while we at home, brother, sister, sucked the bloody air.
I think of a child dancing along a faint chalk line; the sound of his feet, the flop of his hair, and his breath a short skipping rhyme of tumbling aspirates. The small knotted belly, the slightly sweating thigh, the damp neck and palm, and nearby on a bench a mother or elder sister rich in voluptuousness. My sister is an enclosed garden. In the garden the soft wickerwork of worm casts, black earth nipped into buds, scored into clefts and crevices. On windy ways a dancing underground. Inside the bones unsettling swathes of thought, the mind exposed to crisp surgical fingers that pinch it into song, the local floods of swollen veins whose banks cannot contain their discontent. I think of my two children swept along those waves, arriving where they are at pianos and computers, before their mirrors, their eyes illegible, a foreign writing. I was once a child too, leaning over the edge of the pram, examining my brother like a specimen, with my mother behind the lens, her face hidden, rich in voluptuousness.
I meet two soldiers sometimes here in hell. The one, with a tear in the seat of his red pantaloons Was stuck by a pitchfork, Climbing a wall to steal apples. The second has a seeming-silver helmet, Having died from the fall of his horse on some tramlines In Dortmund. These two, Meeting in the vaulted and vaporous caverns of hell, Exclaim always in identical tones: &lsquo;I at least have done my duty to Society and the Fatherland!&rsquo; ... It is strange how the clich&eacute; prevails. For I will bet my hat that you who sent me here to hell Are saying the selfsame words at this very moment Concerning that exploit of yours.
I was edgy, pulling out of a parking lot into Tucson rush hour traffic in Frog, my old green Cougar with its skyroof wide, my faithful 90 pound Oscar's head beside mine, when I noticed the teenager noticing us and nudging his buddies in the red pickup, all of them craning around to see the bearded guy and his dog, and just then Oscar sneezed his magnificent flailing firehose sneeze that covers a 180 degree arc nicely, my face at about 160. Off flew my glasses, and as I wiped his high velocity slobber from cheek and forehead, those kids  maybe Apache, maybe Pima or Tohono O'odham, all smiling like brown Buddhas  left room for me to pull in. How could I ever forget the joy in their smiles at seeing this anglo-honkie get it from his dog like that, how their broad gentle faces widened with amusement, how their dark eyes glowed? And how I couldn't even begin to feel outrage at unmannered Oscar, whose cousin after all is old man Coyote  rule-breaker without equal, who, even in rush hour traffic, is alive and well, whose tail is still wagging at the end of the 20th Century?
There is that whispering gallery where A dark population of the air Gives back to us those vocables We dare not robe in syllables: I speak of the whispering gallery Of all Dionysian poetry Within whose precincts I have heard An apotheosis of the word As down those echoing corridors The Logos rode on a white horse; Till every No that sense could express Turned to a transcendental Yes. Sanctified by such passages Let us exchange our messages, And, as we walk, all enigmas Describe themselves in terms of stars. From those lyrical waterfalls rise Words that bring rainbows to the eyes And memories called up from the ground Smile to see their blood around. There is a spirit of turbulence Inhabiting the intelligence Determined always to impose Another reason on the rose Another cause upon the creature Than the privilege of its nature; A handcuff and a history Upon all natural mystery And this turbulent spirit starts That insurrection in our hearts By which the laws of poetry Are broken into anarchy: The anarchy that seeks to show An altitude which way to go, Or use astronomy to prove That duty is our only love. But over the known world of things The great poem folds its wings And from a bloody breast will give Even to those who disbelieve. By the known world the intellect Stands with its bright gun erect, But the long loving verities Are kissing at the lattices. That dark population of the air Leans downward, singing, to declare The mystery of the world is this: That we do not know what is.
Emerging from aeons of ocean on to the shore The creature found itself in a roadless Forest where nothing stretched before Its lack of limbs but lack of hope Until the trees, millennia later, Parted to grant it greater scope. Emerging from miles of tunnel into a plain The train finds itself in a foreign Beatitude. Creeping fog and rain And deafmute fears are left behind; The stuttering grub grows wings and sings The tune it never thought to find. Emerging from years of lacking into a love The Self finds itself in predestined Freedom. Around, below, above, Glinting fish and piping birds Deny that earth and truth are only Earth, respectively, and words.
Wistfully in pallid splendour Drifts the lonely infinite, A wan perfume vague and tender, Dim with feet of fragile light. Drifts so lightly through the spirit, Breathes the torch of dreams astir Till what promised lands lie near it Wavering are betrayed to her. Ghostly foam of unheard waters, And the gleam of hidden skies, Footsteps of Eve's whiter daughters Tremble to our dreaming eyes. O! sad wraith of joy lips parted, Hearing not a word they say  Even my dreams make broken-hearted And their beauty falls away.
Sung to hammer and anvil accompaniment,the rock he pocketed's point song painted red, Petro, eyes wanting sleep rubbed raw ... Said he was obsessed, made much too much of it, the he she would've otherwise wanted, riven rock. Crawled on his stomach thru dense undergrowth, knocked across the head, saw stars ... &ldquo;Let no tool touch another,&rdquo; he commanded, choked on a kola put out for Ogun, dead but for the book they thumbed
Something cracks every moment because  everything cracks one day, an egg,  armour, a book's spine. The human spine may be  the only exception, though  much depends on pressure, time and place.  Such cases are therefore rare.  Hardly any. Because  there are so many pressures, places and times  around. Cracks are normally stuck together. It is not on record  that anyone would want to go about cracked,  not even the whip-crackers. Cracks are mended with wax, paraffin,  soldered, bandaged. Or talked out of existence. This most of all. But a mended egg is no longer an egg,  soldered armour is no longer armour,  a bandaged heel is an Achilles' heel and  a man talked out of existence is not the man he was,  rather the Achilles' heel of others. Worst of all is when hundreds of mended eggs  pass themselves off as best eggs and hundreds  of suits of soldered armour as true armour,  thousands of cracked people as monoliths. Then it's all one huge crack. All we can do in the world of cracks is  now and then to call out, Mr Director, mind your step on the stairs,  you have a crack, sir, if I may say so. That's all. Afterwards there's only more cracking.
I draw the sheets written with life around me, expose the concupiscent figures of my breasts, lips. Your wife in uncommon laws, I yield to your hands bent toward my thighs where my life parts and unveils euphony's scent. Here in all the hotel rooms, are the places where we made spaces for the sound of love on looms. We rock to the governing grade of time. It varies only with the boom of silence. Here I launch your cavalcade. I tiptoe to where you sit and sing. I come softly to your head, as you reckon what string of notes should begin this bar, be fed into the stream. Jazz brings a union to us. The score moves ahead. I paste my cool hands slowly to your brow, to test myself. I see what bandstands or stately applause shoots through the shelf of your prescience. Innately, you feel me blend self to self. You let your head roll back into the cradle of my hips, press your temple and cheek hard to my navel. I close your eyes, confess the night of work with a kiss to your head. Music stirs. We undress.
Still early still late Have we asked enough questions about space and what surrounds space and the hands of a body tumbling through space Still early still late as a leaf might curl in a certain way thinking to turn into carbonized lace and a body might hurtle through space Does a color experience pain while falling through endless space falling like a blob of sun or a peacock's call (This June we have no rain at all) How far away are the voices you hear and those you can't seem to recall Does each color recite a name as if it were its own yet almost unknowable like a fragrance of plums (Your house is under repair your house is gone) Question of the signs the bodies before us form illegible as dust or eye of noon Why did the Angel Phosphor arrive in that city on that (white) night caduceus held forward in its hand We had joked that there was no city only winter no winter only wind only early and lateness, only streets and blown pages then the day's final words traced in silver fluid at the edge of the stage What then if we spelled &ldquo;after&rdquo; with different letters the letters for &ldquo;first&rdquo; or &ldquo;last,&rdquo; for example for &ldquo;forest of burning boats&rdquo; or &ldquo;farther&rdquo; and it came to mean &ldquo;the chaos of the waterwheel&rdquo; or &ldquo;the glow of the Thomson lamp&rdquo; What if spoken in muteness or danced without memory What if as elsewhere or blinded, but watching the fire helix of flames in the center of a square Have we asked enough questions about changes of light over time Use music if you want Yet let it not reach the ear
The only revolution is among the oaks here in the woods; their mutinous leaves refuse to fall, despite the laws of season and of gravity. Red-coated cardinals hide among those leaves. Red bird, cold weather the farmers say. Know us by our myths. I think of the mutinous Puritans who taught us that all things break. We have forgotten that, disenchanted; amazed as children told for the first time how they were conceived. Still the mind moves continually west, following paths beaten by the sun, risking ambush and early darkness. On Sundays, driving past frontiers lit by milkweed let us find what wilderness is left. Deep in the woods it's possible to see the cruelties between fox and rabbit and their mutual beauty; to study the creeks: how the citizenry of small stones is washed in waters that run to the Potomac, still clear in places, in places muddy. Today the river's a frozen slate, a tabula rasa. It tempts us as it did two hundred winters ago to dare the dangerous freedom of the skater.
Yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow! It is not a color. It is summer! It is the wind on a willow, the lap of waves, the shadow under a bush, a bird, a bluebird, three herons, a dead hawk rotting on a pole  Clear yellow! It is a piece of blue paper in the grass or a threecluster of green walnuts swaying, children playing croquet or one boy fishing, a man swinging his pink fists as he walks  It is ladysthumb, forget-me-nots in the ditch, moss under the flange of the carrail, the wavy lines in split rock, a great oaktree  It is a disinclination to be five red petals or a rose, it is a cluster of birdsbreast flowers on a red stem six feet high, four open yellow petals above sepals curled backward into reverse spikes  Tufts of purple grass spot the green meadow and clouds the sky.
<> the heat rises  the whole beach vacant, sluggish. The forms shift before we know, before we thought to know it. The mind again, the manner of mind in the body, the weather, the waves, the sun grows lower in the faded sky. Washed out the afternoon of another day with other people, looking out of other eyes. Only the children, the sea, the slight wind move with the same insistent particularity. I was sleeping and saw the context of people, dense around me, talked into their forms, almost strident. There were bright colors, intense voices. We were, like they say, discussing some point of procedure  would they go, or come and waking, no one but my wife there, the room faint, bare. &ldquo;It's strange. It's all fallen to grey.&rdquo; How much money is there now? Count it again. There's enough. What changes. Is the weather all there is.
If on the tally-board of wasted days They daily write me for proud idleness, Let high Hell summons me, and I confess, No overt act the preferred charge allays. To-day I thought what boots it what I thought? Poppies and gold! Why should I blurt it out? Or hawk the magic of her name about Deaf doors and dungeons where no truth is bought? Who calls me idle? I have thought of her. Who calls me idle? By God's truth I've seen The arrowy sunlight in her golden snares. Let him among you all stand summonser Who hath done better things! Let whoso hath been With worthier works concerned, display his wares!
Now I feel safe, I've gotten my cardinal back again. I'm standing in Tuscaloosa, watching her hop through the puddles. I'm watching her eat and drink, a brown-chested queen, living outdoors in sweetness and light with a loose and rotten sparrow as her playmate, some common thing not fit to touch her hem, not fit to live with her in the same puddle. I have to walk over a sick dog to see them, and through some bicycles and cardboard boxes. One has a heavy beak and a scarlet headpiece and one has ruffled feathers and a black throat. As long as there is a cardinal in my life I can go anywhere; she was the bird that, as it turned out, freed me fifteen years ago in a town in western Pennsylvania in some unbearable secret rite involving a withered pear tree and a patented furnace. There is a pear tree here too, just to add a little mistiness, and a truck, and a car, waiting beside the puddle like two kind horses. But the cardinal now is sweeter and more whimsical than the last time, maybe a little smaller, and gentler. I talk and the sparrow flies away, for God knows what kind of seed or God knows from what kind of shadow. Someone will say, as he always does, this sparrow is English, you know, you have to make a distinction between him and our own, he is the sloppiest sparrow of all, he is aggressive and promiscuous, just as he lands on the pear tree, just as he lands on the roof of the truck, and someone will say, it is a female cardinal, the male is redder, his chest is bigger and brighter, just as she lands on the car and just as she disappears, a little speck somewhere, a kind of messenger, her throat abounding with information, little farewells to the English sparrow, little bows to the scholars with bird-stuff on their brains and beautiful cries  something between a metallic chirp and a whistle  to the one from Pennsylvania, the one who loves her.
I was talking to the Baroness in the Green Room The page detached, flew away toward the northwest skimming the still surface New York was wonderful in those days like an island but smaller though the headlines were awful face turned to the wall the shapes empty colours and forms breakwater, mulberry, sign of the flower opening, sign of the flower crystallized I'm often in London less than half alive Who are the letters A Who is Baraka Sterling Brown in the blue car Elmo, Bud, James P. Nancy and Sluggo Axel Hugo Teodor Theorell to adjust the mirror so that the head disappears who la danseuse magn&eacute;tique qui se mettra d'elle-m&ecirc;me en mouvement sur une table lisse Then one must close the mouth quickly and clench the teeth fearing pious old men all those things that take time a maxim handed down to us between sleeps fluid and secret charm as the z of xylophone What fame! What a century of empty skies, anodynes, moving sidewalks Wet snow is falling once more The scene as always is tropical
The single letter she'd ever write him, March Of '41. Would he come with her  <> Is  <> Outside, Tallahassee palm leaves snap In gulf breeze like an orchestra of trapdoors. The requisite smells: orange blossom, oleander. She wouldn't, of course, see Florida again. Palmer method flourishes in every line, Fluttering  Fetish in a cedar box, a decades' long cliche, Folded and unfolded. The creases tear. <> Nothing I'll remember or invent. Photographs Of dogs, a legacy of Melmac cups, Closets full of merciless knickknacks Not even dignified as kitsch. Syrup Bottles shaped like Butterfly McQueen. Bronze Star, Silver Star, Good Conduct, Discharge papers in a Woolworth's frame. Harlequins, seven hundred:  <> Fourteen electric razors and his cache of porn Concealed in the dresser by his cardigans And lariat ties. What to save and what to burn? An inventory, not a reckoning: Kane's dropped globe of snow, still careening.
They the receding we we might've been. This their collapsed expectancy,fraught soul so bone-close, teasingly discreet,not to be made an object of. Yet of this they made something else, wondering for what if not imagined impact. Root world whose arrested gleam they'd reignite. &ldquo;Music, mend our hushed unwillingness,&rdquo; they whisper. Dream dreamt in euphoric recoil
Roar of the rushing train fearfully rocking, Impatient people jammed in line for food, The rasping noise of cars together knocking, And worried waiters, some in ugly mood, Crowding into the choking pantry hole To call out dishes for each angry glutton Exasperated grown beyond control, From waiting for his soup or fish or mutton. At last the station's reached, the engine stops; For bags and wraps the red-caps circle round; From off the step the passenger lightly hops, And seeks his cab or tram-car homeward bound; The waiters pass out weary, listless, glum, To spend their tips on harlots, cards and rum.
After Long Absence, I returned from the land of the dead to visit my stepmother in her suburban apartment. I looked from a distance, was it a mental hospital standing on a grass plain far from Manhattan's skyscrapers after crossing Washington Bridge, or Jersey's tract houses risen gigantic during my exile in China? I'd been gone so long my relatives'd grown old at their doors  a neighbor widow come out to empty the black plastic garbagebag, I'd known her middle age, now with white hair she gazed at me nodding absently, I'd not been gone long while her husband'd died, children married with children now  How dear to see me, where'd I been? I looked down the long hall, door after door of Aunts and Uncles retired alive white haired, television bound seeing the doctor, eating delicatessen salad Sundays, reading best seller books, dusting furniture, cleaning kitchen floors, happily visiting Doctors for minor blood pressure, depression or hernias. Years ahead, they should live so long, they'd die, I'd never see them again, best settle down while childhood memory cousins and brothers were old, but still alive, enjoy each other's tables and coffee, business gossip. Where else go off to, unhappy Russia warring Israel? Here in America, peace, a place to live together. They were bombing Nicaragua, factories exploding in India, Cities crowded with Animal muggers newspapers said, TV had pictures of them every nite  Peter in fact just came back from Nuclear Buddhaland, His belly exposed to Radiation a soft yellow spot near his navel, he smiled rueful pulling his shirt above his belt to show his mortal sore, what could cure him? If go away now I'll be gone forever, Peter, Stepmother Edith, Aunt Honey &amp; Leo, Aunt Clara and Uncle Abe, my brother Gene &amp; Connie &amp; the kids, I may never see them again. Here are their living eyes, here's the end of the Immortal Dream.
What a sweet smell rises when you lay the dust  bucket after bucket of water thrown on the yellow grass. The water flashes each time you make it leap  arching its glittering back. The sound of more water pouring into the pail almost quenches my thirst. Surely when flowers grow here, they'll not smell sweeter than this wet ground, suddenly black.
<> The hour in which Death chooses me, And the way in which It will make its arbitrary choice, I can think of nothing better than To fall asleep near midnight in a boat As it enters a new port, In a boat With a clarity of stars above And below it, And all around me Bright music and voices laughing in A language not known to me. I'd like to go that way, Tired and glad, With all my future before me, Hungry still for the fat And visible globe.
When I see you, who were so wise and cool, Gazing with silly sickness on that fool You've given your love to, your adoring hands Touch his so intimately that each understands, I know, most hidden things; and when I know Your holiest dreams yield to the stupid bow Of his red lips, and that the empty grace Of those strong legs and arms; that rosy face, Has beaten your heart to such a flame of love, That you have given him every touch and move, Wrinkle and secret of you, all your life,  Oh! then I know I'm waiting, lover-wife, For the great time when love is at a close, And all its fruit's to watch the thickening nose And sweaty neck and dulling face and eye, That are yours, and you, most surely, till you die! Day after day you'll sit with him and note The greasier tie, the dingy wrinkling coat; As prettiness turns to pomp, and strength to fat, And love, love, love to habit! And after that, When all that's fine in man is at an end, And you, that loved young life and clean, must tend A foul sick fumbling dribbling body and old, When his rare lips hang flabby and can't hold Slobber, and you're enduring that worst thing, Senility's queasy furtive love-making, And searching those dear eyes for human meaning, Propping the bald and helpless head, and cleaning A scrap that life's flung by, and love's forgotten,  Then you'll be tired; and passion dead and rotten; And he'll be dirty, dirty! O lithe and free And lightfoot, that the poor heart cries to see, That's how I'll see your man and you!  But you  Oh, when
For I have seen love and his face is choice Heart of Hearts, a flesh of pure fire, fusing from the center where all Motion are one. And I have known despair that the Face has ceased to stare at me with the Rose of the world but lies furled in an artificial paradise it is Hell to get into. If I knew you were there I would fall upon my knees and plead to God to deliver you in my arms once again. But it is senseless to try. One can only take means to reduce misery, confuse the sensations so that this Face, what aches in the heart and makes each new start less close to the source of desire, fade from the flesh that fires the night, with dreams and infinite longing.
Wake not for the world-heard thunder  Nor the chime that earthquakes toll. Star may plot in heaven with planet, Lightning rive the rock of granite, Tempest tread the oakwood under:  Fear not you for flesh nor soul. Marching, fighting, victory past, Stretch your limbs in peace at last. Stir not for the soldiers drilling  Nor the fever nothing cures: Throb of drum and timbal's rattle Call but man alive to battle, And the fife with death-notes filling  Screams for blood but not for yours. Times enough you bled your best; Sleep on now, and take your rest. Sleep, my lad; the French are landed,  London's burning, Windsor's down; Clasp your cloak of earth about you, We must man the ditch without you, March unled and fight short-handed,  Charge to fall and swim to drown. Duty, friendship, bravery o'er, Sleep away, lad; wake no more.
all these cripplesthe ballet music is what to do energy passes light lightly the shaking swan gives way something physical it's a nightmare like everything else or the hole in the ground bombed out the glassed city outskirtsa gate and oppressive dripping stars a witch sabbath lets up another night much in the country growth one place Queen of the maidens Ah Peasants an unshiftable garden bush grave while you've seen otherwise the way things are done pushing away room colors and acting the fancy village square the hunting party ah yes ah yes how it's familiar essentially soundless dawn the incredible end abandon,to keep dancing
is not like that of a building which is structure on crutches. The sails of the woods were awake. Deeper than rivers forgotten dearer than trees and bushes clear like the music of the birds of the forest of light, bright like the fur of bees or of foxes in the snow and like the deer that come and go, not falling not holding on we steadily meet. Coming and going is neither perfect nor poor, the sails of the forest are open and green. A frond a friend a fern uncurls. Pleased to be pleased.
Go to that place where men can look no more At what on Earth shone brightest. As this wave Leaps to great light, then, scattering, seeks the shore, So your fame rose, that sinks into this grave. Go where dissemblers can no more deprave The dazzling love, nor knock that hidden door Closed on the shrouded body the womb gave, Dark as Christ's hem, as no dark looked before. Yet must the buried shine, if any shines: So sleeps the seed; so shrinks in rigid fold The chrysalis, and hides its patterns old: We touch, but cannot see its waking lines. Honour this dust. The presence God refines Even here is sunk, whose promised flesh is gold.
you &amp; Rimbaud, you are right to love the Great Mother And to despair in a time when Kore only (when Demeter has to be looked for when only the Maiden (when woman does not know she is also who hunts for herself Instead of finding half herself in every ad. There is no hell when hell is toothpaste. And Demeter Oh, Woman: lay about you! Slay! That you may have cause again to seek yourself, to go out among flowers crying &ldquo;Kore! Kore!&rdquo;, knowing the King of Hell also has you
i will wade out till my thighs are steeped in burning flowers I will take the sun in my mouth and leap into the ripe air Alive with closed eyes to dash against darkness in the sleeping curves of my body Shall enter fingers of smooth mastery with chasteness of sea-girls Will i complete the mystery of my flesh I will rise After a thousand years lipping flowers And set my teeth in the silver of the moon
Tyrone married her this afternoon not smiling as he took the aisle and her slightly rough hand. Dizzella listened to the minister staring at his wrist and twice forgetting her name: Do you promise to obey? Will you honor humility and love as poor as you are? Tyrone stood small but next to her person trembling. Tyrone stood straight and bony black alone with one key in his pocket. By marrying today they made themselves a man and woman answered friends or unknown curious about the Cadillacs displayed in front of Beaulah Baptist. Beaulah Baptist life in general indifferent barely known nor caring to consider the earlywed Tyrone and his Dizzella brave enough but only two.
I am not God's little lamb I am God's sick tiger. And I prowl about at night And what most I love I bite, And upon the jungle grass I slink, Snuff the aroma of my mental stink, Taste the salt tang of tears upon the brink Of my uncomfortable muzzle. My tail my beautiful, my lovely tail, Is warped. My stripes are matted and my coat once sleek Hangs rough and undistinguished on my bones. O God I was so beautiful when I was well. My heart, my lungs, my sinews and my reins Consumed a solitary ecstasy, And light and pride informed each artery. Then I a temple, now a charnel house. Then I a high hozannah, now a dirge. Then I a recompense of God's endeavour, Now a reproach and earnest of lost toil. Consider, Lord, a tiger's melancholy And heed a minished tiger's muted moan, For thou art sleek and shining bright And I am weary. Thy countenance is full of light And mine is dreary.
She was getting old, had seen a lot, knew a lot. But something innocent enlivened her, upheld her spirits. She tended a small altar, kept a candle shielded there, or tried to. There was a crash and throb of harsh sound audible always, but distant. She believed she had it in her to fend for herself and hold despair at bay. Now when she came to the ridge and saw the world's raw gash reopened, the whole world a valley of steaming blood, her small wisdom guttered in the uprush; <> darkness and the blast levelled her. (Not her own death, that was not yet.) The deafening downrush. Shock, shame no memory, no knowledge nor dark imagination had prepared her for.
the envy of the elegant childless couple, and the virgin aunt, this fertile shabby pair faintly smell already of unwashed hair, worry about cash and that powder they use for diaper rash on certain fundamental places. They chatter of downtown faces, movies, of tennis on the lawns, sandalwood rooks and ivory pawns, of books in windows, neon signs, the happy walks in shoplit rains they seem to have traded, without any discount, for that Thing hardly kneaded into human shape by some obstetric stranger, filling with its rage the literal manger of their youth among breathing cows that have begun to look like nurses on their toes.
if(touched by love's own secret)we,like homing through welcoming sweet miracles of air (and joyfully all truths of wing resuming) selves,into infinite tomorrow steer  souls under whom flow(mountain valley forest) a million wheres which never may become one(wholly strange;familiar wholly)dearest more than reality of more than dream  how should contented fools of fact envision the mystery of freedom?yet,among their loud exactitudes of imprecision, you'll(silently alighting)and i'll sing while at us very deafly a most stares colossal hoax of clocks and calendars
I found her, rich loser of all, Whom two wars have stripped to the bone, High up on her terrace wall Over vineyards asleep in the sun- Her riches, that ample scene Composed in the barn's round door; Her riches, rough cliff and pine, Aromatic air-and no more. Here, seasoned and sweetened by loss, She thrives like thyme in the grass. This woman's feet are so light, So light the weight of her eyes When she walks her battlements late To harvest her thoughts as they rise, She is never caught, only wise. She rests on the round earth's turning And follows the radiant skies, Then reads Pascal in the morning. And, walking beside her, I learned How those dazzling silences burned. On the longest day of June, When summer wanes as it flowers And dusk folds itself into dawn, We shared the light-drenched hours. We lay on rough rock in the sun, Conversing till words were rare, Conversing till words were done, High up in the pungent air, Then silently paced while the moon Rose to dance her slow pavane. The wine from a meditation Was mine to drink deeply that night, O vintage severe, and elation, To be pressed out of loss, and from light! Alive to her thought, yet alone, As I lay in my bed, close to prayer, A whisper came and was gone: &ldquo;Rejoice&rdquo; was the word in the air. But when the silence was broken, Not by me, not by her, who had spoken?
An old song becomes a dream of you as beautiful as one of those vast blue spring days that only New Yorkers know about. Here I sit, coffee drunk, wondering what will happen when my senses cease. Between my desire for you and your damned departures, can't sleep enough/ there are too many dreams. I watch the edge of this internal magic sharpen as everywhere your face, lips, hands and groin demand the final kisses before I throw you out the door. Before you find someone else, someone new. Who knows? If I toss my tears across the pillow or call my girlfriends and complain how will I accept the beauty of this pain? I sit and drink my coffee and realize that just like Otis Redding what I want is &ldquo;Security.&rdquo; But fool for wanton kisses leaves me waiting out the morning. Angry with the light.
Two aunts in garish rosy prints Sat waiting in the head man's room, Intent on their vocation; there &lsquo;To take me home&rsquo;. They called me in From cricket to my life, my life. They worked in shifts. I dreamed They stroked my arm until it bled. Their eyes reflected me alone With the trust fund of grief I have Never been able to manage myself. Today the rear window flashes Summons to its madman, me. I'm better now. I know they'd say <> <> Born just postwar, I live there still, Young Howard with his special pain, Largactil crust across his mouth. I watch the dead in photographs. My drunken flier with his charm, My drunken blonde with her estate, Both shovelled off the road in bits Along with the MG, kept me In shorts between the knees of aunts Equipped with love, with metal combs. I'm sick of all my annuals, But every Sunday as I count Each piece of gravel on those graves I live my life. I stand erect. They tell me I am feeling proud.
He is a surgeon resectioning the heart. Confessedly dead, yet the corpse sits up and shouts at him, &ldquo;You idiot, do you know how to do anything right?&rdquo; And tries to grab the knife or the dream itself. It seems to him they are struggling over the very nature of reality. On the bed awaking, he who was the doctor is now the patient. So short the life, so long the convalescence! Sad, square, and aching, he accepts his father's dead heart, commonplace, appalling, and the old man's misery and maiming return in the son's chest to their brutal beating. Devoted and good, his normality resurrects in dull parody that bitterness and failure. Unloaded, held to his head, the catastrophic life clicks repeatedly in the empty chambers. Sitting in our room now and carried away for a moment, he says, as if repeating an important lesson, earnestly, with yearning and with pride, &ldquo;Actually, Dad and I have the same sense of humor.&rdquo;
Killed by a white woman on a subway in 1964. he rose to be the first negro congressman from missouri. we're not saying that being dead is the pre requisite for this honor but it certainly helped make him what he is today.
She helped herself along  with a few pills tucked away for such an occasion  &lsquo;a very brave woman,&rsquo; out of it now, not wanting to become &lsquo;a mere vegetable,&rsquo; &lsquo;a burden to others.&rsquo; What are the years that they lead us only to this, the hemlock? And no one believes it when you say you are ready, have no regrets. They themselves plan to hold on more tenaciously  even while wilting to flummery, even while adding ten tons of stone on the daughter, ten on each son. My dearest, make sure our subscription's paid up, and keep the stash handy.
That moment when the mattress splits and seeps its stuffing when floors crack, roads break up, ground gapes that moment when the breathstream dries, the belly ceases to exist and the self can no longer hold on that moment when reason bolts and six obsessive words pound pound on the shell of the emptied brain is the moment the wingspan spreads. The predator descends, traps hair, neck  I am eclipsed. I try to yell for someone to put out the rock-eyes, smash the razor beak, crush the claws, Only a child looms. Weightless as a leaf she's crouched on a mountain ledge whimpering: &lsquo;I can't bear blood, illness, change.&rsquo; I want to take her in my arms, struggle to a safe place, outstare the bird, seize it by the neck, pull the gaudy feathers. I want to call out, voice belled by fierce red joy, to alight, toes touching waterbird rings on lake calm.
flyolfloyd, i kno from barringer, he used to be the daredevil sax playing lover of the old sod, near the hip park where they threw you in, he, with some others, notably Allen Polite, was a lover, and smooth as anything blowin in them parts, in that town, in that time he weighs 400 now and threatens junkies on Howard Street, calling them by first or nick names, really scaring the piss out of them, being &ldquo;a nice guy&rdquo; and all his killings being accidental. Bowleg Otis played football but was always a prick he made detective by arresting a dude he knew all his life, he waited in the cold counting white folks' smiles. Lenny drives a panel truck, Leon parkd in front of the city hospital bullshitting, but he'd split yr head. He was a bad catcher w/ Baxter Terrace, you slide home head first you get messed up strong as a bitch. Herbert Friday, beat up Barry one night, Herbie was a funnytime cat never played anything. Cats used to pop his sister. You wanna stand in front of a bar, with a gun pointed at you? You wanna try to remember why you liked somebody while the bullet comes. Shit.
Grab some Grub sum Sub gum machine stun Treat pork pig feet On floor all fours Train cow chow lane Dice played trade spice Makes fist first steps
Through hoof-marked meadows that lie sodden From winter's overflow, the Loddon Winds by the winding pollard hedge,  Stunt willow-trunks that line the edge, Whose roots like buried eels are sunk, A grove of saplings on each trunk. Its water with a white-frothed mouth Chewing and gnawing the uncouth Loose sticks and straws that in disorder Lie littered on its leaping border, As breath of wind roughens its hide, This way or that way makes its tide. This way or that But O let come May-blossom that in buds lies dumb, This water that laps bush and tree Shall long have drifted to the sea; I almost feel that I too go Caught in its secret lapsing flow.
Mowing the east field under the ridge I wade the wind. The bent-rib scythe found rusting in the barn Swings in the sun; the ancient blade of my wife's great-grandfather, Drawn from the dust of seventy years, riots in the grass. &ldquo;They don't make 'em like this old gull anymore!&rdquo; cackled the smith, Hunched above his spectral grindstone, Shouting across the howl of iron and the fleer of sparks. He paused, spat on the blade, wiping off rust. In the sudden silence The wedding band he wore on his finger chimed fine steel. Cocking his head like a listening bird he snatched up a file and rapped again. &ldquo;Hear that hum in her spine, that tone when she shivers?&rdquo; He barked harsh laughter. &ldquo;Old timers Got a name for it.&rdquo; Turning, he cut the power, Stepped down from the bench.  <> And that hunger Vibrates up the crooked stock as the grass reels. I feel it hum in my arms; stroke on stroke It sings in my shoulders; my collarbone Rings to the pulse of it, the ravenous steel; And I swing with it, made one with it, Wheeling among the standing fern, goat-footed, Trampling tall bracken, ruthless, the radiant flowers: Iris, wild orchid, leopard lily  The flush and shimmering splendor of life! And then the honing: whetstone and steel Kiss each other, they crave it so. They lick their lips greedily together, Like reckless lovers, or as the whore mouths the man. I have to pull them apart. The mad scythe Hisses in the vetch, a snake denied, moans in the yarrow. <> Stroke on stroke coupling through hell. It makes the sex Growl in my groin to call them down, wild iris, lily, The moan and the shudder. All the women in my life Sprawled in the weeds drunk in death.
Spherically wondrous sunbeam dwelling in the mansion of the pine of chastity, today we bought an ice pack for Mildred's injured foot. Luminous shadow in the plumflower chamber, Edna quit her job yesterday, got drunk, stayed drunk, behaved like a defective monster collapsing in the mansion of self-pity. Meanwhile, the great sea of compassion rolled in, rolled out, rolled in. And the blue mountain of itself remains, and the blind shampooers never tire of their work.
<> And there were children singing on a distant hill, One wore blue, the color of the sky; One waved her flowers; one did not turn our way, Continuing her song, a fragile thread, Strung with the rocking waters, the slim boats moving by In bright-sailed arrogance, the flowers spread In spendthrift glory on the hillside's stubble, the cries Of amber and coral hawkers. Do not hark To those who say I have forgotten everything That made us one; I recall the skies Of Italy too blindingly; over in dark That should spell sleep, I remember still The heartbreak song we heard Sorrento daughters sing.
On this hill crossed by the last birds, a sprinkling of soil covers up the rocks with green, as the face drifts on a skull scratched with glaciers. The poem too is a palimpsest, streaked with erasures, smelling of departure and burnt stone. The full moon slides from the clouds, the trees' graves all lie out at their feet: the leaf shaped tongue of the new born and the dying quivers, and no one interprets it. Where is &ldquo;The Apocalypse of Lamech&rdquo;? Where is the &ldquo;Iliupersis&rdquo;? Where is the &ldquo;Khavadhaynamagh&rdquo;? Where is the &ldquo;Rommant du Pet au Deable&rdquo;? Where is &ldquo;The Book of the Lion&rdquo;? Where is the servantose of the sixty girls of Florence? Where are the small poems Li Po folded into boats and pushed out on the river? Where are the snows that fell in these graves? On a branch in the morning light, at the tip of an icicle,the letter C comes into being trembles, to drop, or to cling? Suddenly a roman carapace glitters all over it. Look: Here is a fern-leaf binding  here is a lightning-split fir the lines down its good side becoming whit- manesque and free, here is  here is a hound chasing his bitch in trochaic dimeter brachycatalectic, here are the pits where the tongue-bone is hurled at its desolate cry, here are my own clothes composing  here is a fly convulsing down the poisoned labyrinth of this hand- writing, here is an armful of last-year's-snows. The moment in the late night, when baby birds closed in dark wings almost stir, and objects on the page grow suddenly heavy, hugged by a rush of strange gravity: the surgery of the funeral and of the funeral oration, the absence in the speech I will have left in the world of Where are &ldquo;The Onions&rdquo; that I saw swollen with tears on a grocery shelf in 1948? <> driven crazy on a locust post.
Who would dare translate him back to sharecropper, father of woes, mound of red earth marked with tin, reed in the wind? Grandfather, our Robert E. Lee, victor over rock in the great Wilderness, General of melons, onions, forger of his own iron plow and wheel, he stood in gray dignity, flood at his feet, weeds for his crops, staunch in his business of losses. A gentleman, bearded like Lee, grizzly, his saber a hoe, his mount a gray mule, his campaign in truth a great Wilderness. His medals were brass buttons of overalls. He's in bronze, upright on horseback, his tomb gilt-doored, nobly pillared. Stained glass could tell the stations of his life, the walk from Tennessee, the hardship farming, wife dead in childbirth, those rough years of the Depression, the flivver sold and all dignity like flotsam of a flood gone quickly, nor does that river turn, bring back. By my time all sign was gone of the good life lost. He spat tobacco past me before he hitched that mule to plow the worthless acres. His stub hand held a melon like a world, turned it.
What is my home, what is my city and home, My avenue of palms, where the traffic ever Rides and rides, My Telegraph Avenue where the message filters, My Shattuck Square of stores? You are my home, you are my city lights In which the morning sun entangles when it comes Over our shoulder like an Easter. You are my western loss That brings the city back into its shine. And I am my home, I am my country town Through which the highway roars that 101 Leads on its way. I am the town that to your highway turns And goes along with it a little while.
It seems I should have noticed the others, the others burning in the forest boats, and how unusual it is to be late because of them. The rain has fallen so long tonight that now the square makes a false reflection  it seems like there are carriages where there are only people standing, it seems like the hour is a diploma of false rain, that there is no memory, that the streets continue with madness until they end where the fields are, where the backward water washes against the back forest. This is only the hope of a meditation. That there is no memory  that this is the graduate death stepping out of his carriage in the rain, in the odd city in the middle of the forest. The voices bend, a train's whistle equally bends: if there is no memory there is no accident. You may wonder why I keep such odd hours, why I never get reviewed. Rationale: I have forgotten almost every name, so the names return in the forest boats, with horror I write each new name in my ledger, and I am the horror who is only a keeper of names. Names, my friend, names. Turn off your light and say the word names, names. Names, names. Yesterday I followed the mad fireeaters, who were fighting for the title of fire. One of them awoke and asked for her grades. &ldquo;Sometimes there was some image of a fire. A few children surrounded their tub with lit candles and the fire of the boat people emptied out over no houses. In the hideous city of the forest only small spaces of unlit sky where the memory can return again.&rdquo;
In only a few days they will change houses, the counselor and his wife, daughter, maid, adopted  son, so I work my way around their patio, momentary cousin loosening stanchions and a green wire trellis. Eleven o'clock, the Limmat shines below, gulls glide to the rapids, plop in, drift down, and skim  back, prospecting where a trail threads budding poplars. The consulting room gapes onto foggy sun, a drained fishbowl, the drapes not yet unhooked. More than half of the bolts have frozen fast. I use the hacksaw and roll the trellis into tumbleweed. Crows preen among tips of the shore forest. Across the river, more poplars, then a sprawling factory, then a multilane, and then hazy mountains. Cloudy glass flung wide, cockpit of aid vacant, steady cello twang of the road washing over. A spider blows from the trellis to go the wind's way. Don't worry, Brother Eight-legs, God cleans house without  fussing. The last time I did this I carried the owner's clavichord like a fairy coffin out to the front lawn and, weary, laid it across two chairs to pick through the F-minor fugue by Sebastian Bach. Halfway through the second countersubject I found the upper voice in my left hand, the lower in my right. May we always be so lucky. And may we only half notice. Packing my own house, pushing our girl on her swing, I saw in her brave face more than I thought could break  there. No instrument this time, but there's a river, there are  mountains. Facing them, the gardener walks towards the brink. He unbolts the jagged scimitar from his pruning grip and slips in a larger, shinier scimitar. He swipes down through the first wiry rank of brush to grasp the lanky trunk of a golden sapling. The top branches wiggle, and then sway, and plunge  over. He descends further, another one falls like a flail, and two crows flap up. It is nearly noon. He takes off his red shirt, folding it like a flag, and begins the climb back uphill, wiping his steel. He will sit down and eat. Midday veils the mountains. And so, tell us again: why this endless spring wind? Why do we cross the river?
I find myself alone again as I have always been, a shell of my last self held to my ear: I came to on a quiet shore unmarred by fruitfulness, province of impetuous rain and vagrant light. Here are some whelks, winkles, and weeks spent walking the tide line listening for one voice, waves hissing beneath the surf of someone white, windblown, and weightless as rising mist. I who wanted everything that can't be touched. I stepped into August water the way a god steps into his new world, my own ancestor until morning. Late summer makes me bold. Luminescent algae respond to every movement of my translucent limbs, every insistent surge that prods the puzzled shore until it opens into a latticework of light, the slide of light toward and then away from land. My blind eye multiplies a fume of sky when I look down: the air's been beaten down to foam. And should I ever return to that promised land of error and facility, what apologies could I carry like tidal pools in two cupped palms, the rust of sand escaping from my grasp? This scene hostaged to fog and heat mirages repeats itself like any weather. (The pole star floats in place like a buoy, doubled by the accidental sea.) Remember me as stone and undertow, the salt that I forgot, and take this sudden shower for reply: a sheet of cloud's been hung out on a line.
I've made out a will; I'm leaving myself to the National Health. I'm sure they can use the jellies and tubes and syrups and glues, the web of nerves and veins, the loaf of brains, an assortment of fillings and stitches and wounds, blood a gallon exactly of bilberry soup  the chassis or cage or cathedral of bone; but not the heart, they can leave that alone. They can have the lot, the whole stock: the loops and coils and sprockets and springs and rods, the twines and cords and strands, the face, the case, the cogs and the hands, but not the pendulum, the ticker; leave that where it stops or hangs.
To wait, to watch. Vocation Of the prisoner and the poet. Not those who choose to watch, Chess-players, crossword-puzzlers, those who flinch From the blazing face of Time, and focus On small exacting things. But the poets, The prisoners, whose stretch is finite, Look straight in Time's face, and see The unrepeatable marvel of each second. Consider these prisoners, these poets. Consider also those who are taught not to see, To blanket violence by conditioning; Decent men, kind to wives, who must not know Which of them pressed the button; Who must learn to see the dummy, not the person; Who must be helped, by rectal plug and catheter, Not to smell the body's final protest. Consider these men also. And those who give them their orders.
His blood shines he is ready to face doom Just promise him the rain and pour wine into his glass His veins illuminated his blood is ink He's writing the world's sorrow His blood is fire When he arrives in tatters at the gates of palaces the beams the arches will burn down Oh Silence continue to echo bring back answers from everywhere
The uspshot of their meeting was a quiet despair. She never spoke her mind. He looked beyond her eyes. The fading light of eveing gathered round her hair. She lied to be with him. He had his stock of lies. The moment's banal beauty filled him with despair. He saw a vast illusion smoulder in her eyes. If he should make a sing, for instance touch her hair, Her&lsquo;tenderness&rsquo; would get a chance eclipsing lies. They did not say a thing to counteract despair. Nor planned to satisfy the hunger in their eyes. A little guiltily she smoothed down her hair, And safe in her affection he told his moderate lies. They left reluctantly but took with them despair. A dozen heads were turned on them with prying eyes. He shook her hands, but wished to stroke her waiting hair. And dragged his feet in going home to tell his lies.
What are you saying? That you want eternal life? Are your thoughts really as compelling as all that? Certainly you don't look at us, don't listen to us, on your skin stain of sun, dust of yellow buttercups: I'm talking to you, you staring through bars of high grass shaking your little rattle O the soul! the soul! Is it enough only to look inward? Contempt for humanity is one thing, but why disdain the expansive field, your gaze rising over the clear heads of the wild buttercups into what? Your poor idea of heaven: absence of change. Better than earth? How would you know, who are neither here nor there, standing in our midst?
Knocking on the door  you open, after every absence yours or mine   as our grounds and elevations realign themselves, you  on the step below me, one or both of the kids above  I'm struck again as you face me, turn your back, stricken  by how small you are. Bird mother, busy woodland  creature mother beginning-small and ending-small  I don't believe that it's only a kernel blown to husk  the great revolve and vanishing- point of our figure of eight  as you cross the kitchen, lower the gas and we, entering  let the small shock pass that is the shock: for  watching your anxious steps vanishing deep down corridors  to return with gifts, it's more with a sense of vastness, height  that I see you shrink; of radiance, like your candle  lit in the daytime, that I notice how pale your hair and skin seem  beside ours. Dwindling, as hollows  deepen, brighten and what is nearest catches light  in the circle you inhabit and I inherit, knowing my reach is smaller  much too small to lift and shawl you in my arms, fading  you intensify, like candlelight on scalloped lace, in the pink  the very fabric of our lives.
O answering Luck!us who are agile souls, who do the necessary and also think up new things and sometimes we have adventured in rough places and among enemies  then do you, O subtile O understanding answering Luck! smile at and accompany some of us, and they are wreathed with shining success and roseate with pleasure; we others, though, look after wistfully as you two vanish and the door closes; it tastes us bitter and we wish to God we had been idle, we would be less hurt. Thou invigorating poison that while I flush and breathe destroyest rest tossest me sleepless Hope!only last night in pain and joy I forethought to wryly praise thee dread drug I could not sleep. And now tonight I neither can sleep until at last I'll cry myself to sleep and let go of my life, for thou hast not so much vanished as grimly shone thine other thy real face Expected Disappointment.
Run out the boat, my broken comrades; Let the old seaweed crack, the surge Burgeon oblivious of the last Embarkation of feckless men, Let every adverse force converge  Here we must needs embark again. Run up the sail, my heartsick comrades; Let each horizon tilt and lurch  You know the worst: your wills are fickle, Your values blurred, your hearts impure And your past life a ruined church  But let your poison be your cure. Put out to sea, ignoble comrades, Whose record shall be noble yet; Butting through scarps of moving marble The narwhal dares us to be free; By a high star our course is set, Our end is Life. Put out to sea.
&sbEacgr;&sgr;&pgr;&egr;&tgr;&egr; &ngr;&ugr;&ngr; &mgr;&ogr;&igr; Tell me now &sbiacgr;&sgr;&tgr;&eacgr; &tgr;&egr; &pgr;&aacgr;&ngr;&tgr;&agr; discover in me my dwelling in earth-hold and airin this time and place  <> The sybil alonesees thereoracular forms Mnemosyne above directingremind me, attendant Muses &agr;&sbugr; ... &sbegr;&rgr;&eacgr;&ohgr; &rbeegr;&mgr;&egr;&igr;&sfgr; &dgr;&egvgr; &kgr;&lgr;&eacgr;&ogr;&sfgr; &ogr;&sbigr;&ogr;&ngr; &sbagr;&kgr;&ogr;&uacgr;&ogr;&mgr;&egr;&ngr; &ogr;&sbugr;&dgr;&eacgr; &tgr;&igr; &sbiacgr;&dgr;&mgr;&egr;&ngr; no more than truth's rumors and our learning no knowing is broken themes in passages of the wind heard EratohereMuse of the Kithara,sing for mesing meblowing upon that reed yet the charge of a note coming into our historiesthat alluretouching songs rise and fallenchantingwhat government regulates this state of Mindthe beat steadywhere we wonder.
<> &ldquo;Julia&rdquo;; A simpler name there could not be  Julia: But seeing it I seemed to see A Devon garden, pleasantly About a parsonage, the bee Made drowsy-sweet; where rosemary And pink and phlox and peony  Bowed down to one Whom Herrick made to bloom in Poetry. A moment there I saw her stand,  Julia; A gillyflower in her hand,  Julia: And then, kind-faced and big and bland, As raised by some magician's wand, Herrick himself passed by, sun-tanned, And smiling; and the quiet land Seemed to take on and understand  A dream long dreamed, And for the lives of two some gladness planned. And then I seemed to hear a sigh,  &ldquo;Julia!&rdquo; And someone softly walking nigh,  Julia: The leaves shook; and a butterfly Trailed past; and through the sleepy sky A bird flew, crying strange its cry  Then suddenly before my eye Two lovers strolled They knew not why  I looked amazed,  But I had seen old ghosts of long dead loves go by.
She enters a room exuding displeasure, strewing bits of string, grievances, bottlecaps, hairnets, law books, like largess to all corners. From the seams of her change purse leak Travelers Cheques, photos of used-car salesmen (dear brothers-in-law), strychnine, ragged old horoscopes and gifts of broken glass. Daughter to the planet Saturn, mother to my wife  Her courtiers, we direct her, mix martinis for her find causes for her, lost umbrellas and car keys even at the gates of hell.
St. Joseph to the Carpenters said on a Christmas Day: &ldquo;The master shall have patience and the 'prentice shall obey; And your word unto your women shall be nowise hard or  wild: For the sake of me, your master, who have worshipped Wife  and Child. But softly you shall frame the fence, and softly carve the door, And softly plane the table as to spread it for the poor, And all your thoughts be soft and white as the wood of the  white tree. But if they tear the Charter, let the toscin speak for me! Let the wooden sign above your shop be prouder to be  scarred Than the lion-shield of Lancelot that hung at Joyous Garde.&rdquo; St. Crispin to the shoemakers said on a Christmastide: &ldquo;Who fashions at another's feet will get no good of pride. They were bleeding on the Mountain, the feet that brought  good news, The latchet of whose shoes we were not worthy to unloose. See that your feet offend not, nor lightly lift your head, Tread softly on the sunlit roads the bright dust of the dead. Let your own feet be shod with peace; be lowly all your lives. But if they touch the Charter, ye shall nail it with your knives. And the bill-blades of the commons drive in all as dense array As once a crash of arrows came, upon St. Crispin's Day.&rdquo; St. Luke unto the painters on Christmas Day he said: &ldquo;See that the robes are white you dare to dip in gold and red; For only gold the kings can give, and only blood the saints; And his high task grows perilous that mixes them in paints. Keep you the ancient order; follow the men that knew The labyrinth of black and white, the maze of green and  blue; Paint mighty things, paint paltry things, paint silly things or  sweet, But if men break the Charter, you may slay them in the  street. And if you paint one post for them, then ... but you know  it well, You paint a harlot's face to drag all heroes down to hell. Almighty God to all mankind on Christmas Day said he: &ldquo;I rent you from the old red hills and, rending made you free. There was charter, there was challenge; in a blast of breath  I gave; You can be all things other; you cannot be a slave. You shall be tired and tolerant of fancies as they fade, But if men doubt the Charter, ye shall call on the Crusade  Trumpet and torch and catapult, cannon and bow and blade, Because it was My challenge to all the things I made.&rdquo;
Weather bothered him, and the delicate muscular, Neural and cortical events within him: Fancies of the pressure of the air Within his nostrils, the blood in the arteries. He built his gauges out of an incantation Of scraps and boards, a nail, a snip of string, And then at evening perhaps by means of a mirror, With glances over his shoulder for possible ghosts, He read the remoter records of the machine Of his own self, its shifting digestive balance With minerals, oxygen and the protein complex, The wavelengths of sound, light, and stellar synthesis. The data became memories; they too were marked On the crooked dials of his instruments  While always, turning within, he sought a constant Of pure numbers glowing like phosphorus. He will be forgotten like his friends the Greeks, Whose notation, too, was inept, and who had no mechanics For their curious dreams. I still remember him As he talked to himself stumbling across the yard.
Now I can see The buds are green again On every tree. Through the dear intercourse of sun and dew, Of thrilling root, and folding earth, anew They come, in beauty. They up to the sun, As on a breast, are lifting every one Green leaves. Under the eaves The sparrows and the swallows Are in love. There is a chatter in the woods above, Where the grim crow Is telling what his sweetheart wants to know. For the sun Is shining fair, And the green Is on the tree; And the wind Is everywhere Whispering So urgently! You will die Unless you do Find a mate To whisper to.
The round-backed river Like a sleek, white cow Shivers with day arriving In the light of innocence The slag is washed away I make my soul, am peaceful As though I had never sinned; Never lied to the people Lying to themselves As I flagged them on with promises Like the lover loving less than the beloved Looking in her gentle face Comforting her with lies. The sun was gone from my father's garden The white bodies vanished from the stream And gunmetal twilight steeled my madness; And I wore the pandemonium of the heroes. But the antique stuffs I wrapt my virtue in: Porous they proved to the maleficent winds When prison walls Roared in my ears high and black like thunder The time I signed away the men I loved. Where were the hero-selves that my imperium Summoned from the  To walk with me on the lawns in my green time? Were they our forebears, then, the great dead? The ghosts of children without bread and milk Thronged my threshold; their fathers Wept without tears. I shouted in the Assembly; the deputies Blushed in the drama. They knew and I The Goddess Reason's treasonable trance. Scarlet fuchsias open their honey In the linen-pure morning. Here no children haunt me  O chiming, ventral river, if thou wert Lethe! Men of pleasure say I have wronged them Who wronged themselves; hatred in their eyes Like poor, shining straw. The new President will fatten the poor: But my factions in the misty pubs Will strike the benches in shame For the right denial, the personal curse foregone. Still to quiet the children's crying, how I would give My one blood and heart! But that was done, Christ! Nor did that Tree bear like a round apple The all good here; nevertheless As the water bears the light equably And as I will have no shame before my father I bear my life Without regret or praise. Bitter watercress Long water widening to where There is but water and light and air.
I heard her singing, Voice like a fire in a wineflask, I stepped into the circle where She sang in the dark of the dolmens, I remembered the admonitions That chilled chimney corners and churches, I remembered the slender curve of her Waist and her hips' sudden burgeon, I lay down between the dolmens Dark as tombs in the moon's lack, I held her in my arms close, I took from her the fruit of the darkness That binds my bones to her will. Now I cannot remember What I did when I had a will, I cannot remember any longer What I did when I had a soul But wander from moonless to moonless Crossroad, a lack-love driven To stumble through rockpit and furze In an aching shadow imprisoned Till all my fivewits serve her; I have eaten the fruit of the darkness And am freed thereof To lie seven years in green bower, To be king of the bone and the blood, To be priest in the tabernacle Of the turf and holy seed, To defy the coming of rooks' covens That will whirl winters round my rimed head Who lay seven years of her kingdom Emperor and in thrall, Despite all to be struck down from faithless Time's tower in the end, True to the end remaining To the one love, ineluctable.
To Cardonette, to Cardonette,  Back from the Marne the Bosches came With hearts like lead, with feet that bled  To Cardonette in the morning. They hurry fast through Cardonette:  No time to stop or ask the name, No time to loot or rape or shoot  In Cardonette this morning. They hurry fast through Cardonette,  But close behind with eyes of flame The Turco steals upon their heels  Through Cardonette in the morning. And half a mile from Cardonette  He caught those Bosches tired and lame, He charged and broke their ranks like smoke  By Cardonette in the morning. At Cardonette, at Cardonette,  He taught the Bosche a pretty game: He cut off their ears for souvenirs  At Cardonette in the morning.
If I make the lashes dark And the eyes more bright And the lips more scarlet, Or ask if all be right From mirror after mirror, No vanity's displayed: I'm looking for the face I had Before the world was made. What if I look upon a man As though on my beloved, And my blood be cold the while And my heart unmoved? Why should he think me cruel Or that he is betrayed? I'd have him love the thing that was Before the world was made.
Hurt dogs crawl under a bush. A hurt friend circles the house, refusing to look in. He makes a grave commotion in the yard and the jay elevates the clamor of  <> edges from the pine. You call through the glass. No answer. He's busy with his curses, scuffing up a froth of dandelions  isn't this what you wanted, your own grievance, that sets the table with one white plate? Water on stones, horses dozing upright in their stalls, the pink of a weak sky recalling the tertiary theme of some great work, you cross the grass, moving toward him the way one greets an animal, extending the hand.
Two heavy trestles, and a board Where Sato's gift, a changeless sword, By pen and paper lies, That it may moralise My days out of their aimlessness. A bit of an embroidered dress Covers its wooden sheath. Chaucer had not drawn breath When it was forged. In Sato's house, Curved like new moon, moon-luminous, It lay five hundred years. Yet if no change appears No moon; only an aching heart Conceives a changeless work of art. Our learned men have urged That when and where 'twas forged A marvellous accomplishment, In painting or in pottery, went From father unto son And through the centuries ran And seemed unchanging like the sword. Soul's beauty being most adored, Men and their business took The soul's unchanging look; For the most rich inheritor, Knowing that none could pass Heaven's door That loved inferior art, Had such an aching heart That he, although a country's talk For silken clothes and stately walk, Had waking wits; it seemed Juno's peacock screamed.
Dorothy Harbison,  stumps into the barn on her cane and my arm, invites the filly to nuzzle her face, her neck and shoulders, her snowdrift hair and would very likely be standing there still to be nibbled, never enough for either of them, so sternly lovestruck except an impatient middle-aged daughter waits to carry her mother off. In Camden, Maine the liveryman at the end of town, a floridly grand entrepreneur, sends for Dorothy whenever he has a prospect at hand. She is nine or ten. Given a knee up she can ride any horse on the place. If the deal goes through, a 50&cent; piece pops in her pocket, but Dorothy's pride soars like a dirigible, its ropes untied. <> combing the filly's mane with her fingers, soothing and kneading with practiced hands from throatlatch to sensitive poll to withers. <> It's the year of the Crash. I'm almost four. My father is riding a horse for hire in the manicured parkland at Valley Green. When he clops into sight the trees take fire, the sun claps hands, dust motes are becalmed. They boost me up to his shifting throne  Whoa, Ebony! and I put my palms flat on the twitching satin skin that smells like old fruit, and memory begins. Leaving, Dorothy Harbison speaks to the foal in a lilting croon: <> <> and stumps out fiercely young on her cane.
By the Nor'Yett, the wund blaws fu o saun, Lanelie fae time's jizzen tae thir days! The wid crines, the gress yallas at hairst. I sclim tours an tours  tae vizzy the barbour straths: Oorie barmekin, the lift, the braid desart. Nae waw stauns noo i this clachan. Banes blanchit wi a thoosan forsts, Hie-humphit deid-knoks, owrheildit wi trees an gress; Wha brung uz thir effeirs? Wha brung the levin o the cankert coorts? Wha brung the airmy wi its touk an tarantara? Barbour keengs. A douce spring, cheengit tae bluid-gowpin hairst. A stramash o fechters, spreed owr this haill kintra, Three hunner an saxty thoosan, An dool, dool lik dash an dag. Dool awaw, an dool, dool at retour. Toom, toom faulds, Wi nae a chiel o the fecht upo them,  Nae langer birkies tae gaird or tae breenge. Och, hoo sall ye ken the doolie wae at the Nor'Yett, Wi oor ledar Li Mu's name negleckit, An uz, the gairdsmen, fother for teegers.
You dreamed of drowning there, but couldn't read the platitudes erosion wrote with sand. High tide burned up the light, spray left you blind to every line that leads a horse to water and makes him drink the salt. You wanted to know why a cup of ocean sluiced down a waiting throat would parch the irrigated flesh, why sharks have to keep moving, stalking oxygen. Like you waking to morning blinking fitfully through plastic blinds, palm fronds, at sea no farther out than anyone, they are too restless to be held in those clean waters and preserved. They can't be still there and still breathe, the body finding its own level like any water. That was over your head. There was something else you wanted from the light, whiter than salt boiling to foam and glistening as error. Gulls staggered across fractal clouds, drunk on any prevailing draft. You combed the crumbling dunes for desiccated sand dollars and doubloons, driftglass rubbed down to amber, tiger's eye and jade: found only crumpled Styrofoam and paper cups, castaway's note crammed in a green wine bottle, tossed into a blue garbage can instead of cursive whitecaps. It might as well have been a beach. I saw you there. Here's sand to fit your eye, here's a salt rose, kelp rope, pearled abalone shell, turbinate purple whelks and, far out, something swimming into evening light laid on the sea to dry.
prickled at the books lying thick as dust, at the death trap of flexes in the dining room where  of those computers instead of doing a proper job in an office. Hoisting distaste under her overall, she put on her Marigold gloves. Upstairs  scrawling on paper. No hint of a dressing-table. In the loo: postcards of women worse than naked, and a stain beyond redemption. <> was scouring the bath's ancient taps. &lsquo;In a week or two I'll make these shine like moons,&rsquo; she promised, knowing she wasn't coming back. Once home, she'd soak off the morning in a bath fragrant with orchid essence, dream of Niagaras of bleach tipping into sinks, work tops white as sanctity, and a chrome dazzle fixed in a flawless sky obliterating the hordes of ants always threatening to wriggle under her door, her skin.
I am that land, surrounding sea And sky; the structure of my hand Spreads promontories, and the mountains of knees Penetrate the great clouds of your desire: Where my eye flies glitter involuntary suns Like blooms munificent, if blown afire From eager sparks, your kiss: upon my shoulder Depends the imagined world of your animation Having, behaving, being: should a short tremor Of my betrayal shake that umbilical world That, like my child, is you, my satellite, Would, with a seismic cry, broken in two, Like the moon split, and from the shrieking fissure Thousand on thousand of doomed you's falling.
Verge in me, matter, I feel you tell me, feel whom he lay, and after, who came as Creature determinate, fixed, detained by counsel, to see who lay there, all human nature noble as the sea, keel to his fated noonday's oarways, how parted from her fades. Null winters do sear such and more, pearl low sky cold under the terms of space  Go see it germinate, or quest a flower which stays always new, meridian fact, say this charity oozes into mortal eye seeing die spirits and fountain vivacity. Thunder, say the answer: one day a gentle valley will equal vault-grazing Everest one recurrent truth is an answer: all Will would our senses deny.
The clouds have gathered, and gathered, and the rain falls and falls, The eight ply of the heavens are all folded into one darkness, And the wide, flat road stretches out. I stop in my room toward the East, quiet, quiet, I pat my new cask of wine. My friends are estranged, or far distant, I bow my head and stand still. Rain, rain, and the clouds have gathered, The eight ply of the heavens are darkness, The flat land is turned into river. &ldquo;Wine, wine, here is wine!&rdquo; I drink by my eastern window. I think of talking and man, And no boat, no carriage, approaches. The trees in my east-looking garden are bursting out with new twigs, They try to stir new affection, And men say the sun and moon keep on moving because they can't find a soft seat. The birds flutter to rest in my tree, and I think I have heard them saying, &ldquo;It is not that there are no other men But we like this fellow the best, But however we long to speak He can not know of our sorrow.&rdquo;
Everything starts in the same way. The eye grows weary of checking where they hide their diamonds. These amateur smugglers put them everywhere but mostly in the same predictable places  in vulva or anus armpit, shoe (how can they walk?) perineum behind scrotum (how can they sit down?) in their mouths so that they mumble in their ears so I have to shout. They're smuggling diamonds from the East but most of them, maybe all, have forgotten they're doing that &amp; mostly think of themselves as innocent  it's been a long trip. Where's the diamond? What's a diamond? that's what they tell me yet when I look at them quietly my eyes not accusing, just being clear on them &amp; at them, they get nervous, anxious, soon reveal where they hid the stone or where without even their full conscious awareness the stone was hidden in them by professionals or for all they knew maybe it hid itself in them. I can tell by the way they squirm what part of their bodies it's hidden in. And then I have to call it out, treat them carefully &amp; make them discover the stone themselves. They feel better when they find it. I'm not supposed to touch them but sometimes their grace or awkwardness touches me, &amp; I move to help, be of help, remind them of all the places, dark hollows of themselves. Sometimes I reach in &amp; touch the stone.
Let History provide its Theme  The noblest action of the race. A State is founded on the dream Thy hand shall draft, thy brush retrace; Recall that Faith, known as a boy, When Friends met in thy Father's home; The Silence; Inward Light; then Joy. A greater power than raised up Rome Drew here the great Proprietor, With Love, and Justice, in his heart. On childhood's scenes, recalled, outpour This consummation of thy art: In the right foreground, an Indian dame Gives her swaddling babe the breast, Each wholly innocent of shame; That child's, the  With natural grace the Lenape Are grouped as though sprung from the Land; The Quakers, stiffly, garbed in gray, Before their new-built houses stand. Beneath the Shackamaxon elm He smiles, and graciously extends The liberal hand that guides the realm To his trusting Savage friends. A dozen Sachems gather round; In chieftain's hand, the Peace-Pipe rests. Two seamen, kneeling on the ground, Show linens to Penn's naked guests. At the left, some kilted sailors sit While another carries from the shore A crate with the Old World's wealth in it. The Sachems pow-wow, asking more. Thy paints shall celebrate what Penn Wrought with those Indians in the glade: No wars nor warpaints mar these men Whom God in His own Image made.
First time I saw Sally She was moving through the meadow Lazing on her mother's lovely arm. Together in the big marquee She was just the right size for beauty Held against my heart, And I saw her daddy smile A wider smile. Milk was warm Blue air was chilly Trees and hedges Danced circles round Sally Green afternoon Green afternoon And my heart filled up again.
In Healey's Palace I was sitting  Joe at the ivories, Irene spitting Rag into the stinking dizzy Misbegotten Hall, while Lizzie, Like a she-demon in a rift Of Hell-smoke, toured the booths, half-piffed. I saw two rah-rahs caps, soft shirts, Match-legs, the kind of face that hurts, The walk that makes death sweet Ted Gore And Alec Ross; they had that whore Mary between them.Don't know which, One looked; and May said: &ldquo;The old bitch Lulu, as I'm a virgin, boys!&rdquo; And I yelled back over the noise: &ldquo;Did that three-legged baby croak That you got off the salesman-bloke?&rdquo; The beer-glass missed.It broke instead On old man Davenport's bald head. I picked a platter up, one-handed. Right on her new straw lid it landed. Cheest, what a crash! Before you knew, Ted slipped the management a new Crisp five, and everyone sat down But May, that said I'd spoiled her gown, And me, that blubbered on her shoulder, And kissed her shiny nose, and told her I didn't mean to smash her ... Crowst, But I was beautifully soused! I think Al called me &ldquo;good old sport,&rdquo; And three smokes lugged out Davenport.
The gap you leave beside me is unfillable. I have had just enough of you to care. I wish your name contained an extra syllable. Please do not ever shave or cut your hair. If only there was altogether more of you, Though some would argue there's already quite a lot. I'm hoping to deprive the foreign poor of you. I've no desire to stay at home and write a lot Nor will I be donating you to charity. Let's face it I've become proprietorial. I don't need someone mystical or taroty To tell me this weekend is a memorial To last weekend and to the time I spent with you. You left too soon and I was in a hurry so I failed to mention maybe sharing rent with you. Do I look sick? I eat a lot of curry though. Each morning is a painful anniversary. I stank of smoke and scotch but you smelled clean to me. If I could get a special grant or bursary I'd fill in forms, explaining what you mean to me. I asked for nothing at the time. How cool I was, How casual. I'm sorry for misleading you. All subsequent events show what a fool I was. I should have known that I would end up needing you. I act like I'm some expert on relationships. Right now I'm waiting for my life to mend a bit, Eating a bag of Piccadilly Station chips And writing this. You'll never hear the end of it.
After making the rounds where Van Gogh had drunk his absinthe, Ernest decided Arles might be a great town for painters but absolutely worthless for writers. There were no bullfights in the Roman arena and if he walked into the countryside all he was apt to see were yellow cornfields and too many black crows overhead. And absinthe was no longer to be had, not in Arles. Just for the hell of it he imagined Gertrude Stein sitting in a field, yelling for Alice B. Toklas to chase a cow. Then Gertrude could write about it write a little, then make Alice run around Some more, then write some more. Ernest knew he could have been, had he chosen to, a hell of a painter, but because he had not, this Arles and its environs were someone else's landscape this from the man who assumed Paris was his.
Nothing surprises me. Except what you can actually make. Nothing, then nothing, for years or minutes. Till the color seeps in to the skin, wearing the nerves, as night, on the outside. And cars go by insensitive, making french music. Talk among ruins. Dust settling how many years, to make it plain as to how far into space my grandfather leaned. Is leaning, as a hacked tree with news for hunters. Direction, or its multiple reality. (City at the edge/ of flat land.) He leans. (A head) steering the ship.
We loved the illimitable night,  We loved the interminable sea,  We loved, on flower and vine and tree,  The candid foliage wet with light. We loved the thunder and the might  Of mountains and ineffably  We loved the power that made us be  Lovers of life and life's delight. We loved the innocent joys of earth,  The poise and peace of natural things,  We loved the miracle of birth; We loved, beyond life's last release,  The shadow as of stirless wings,  The silence and majestic peace.
It's grammarians that the gods torment and Homer's Monthly (if that!) the grudging nanny wraps their measly pittance in papyrus scraps. She nicks some, switches coins, and not content holds out her grasping claws for 10%, then lays at teacher's feet a screw of stuff like paper poppies on a cenotaph. Just get one loving father to agree to pay (in decent gold!) a  the eleventh month, just when it's almost due, he'll hire a &lsquo;better teacher&rsquo; and fire you. Your food and lodging gone, he's got the gall to crack after-dinner jokes about it all.
Don't talk to me of love. I've had an earful And I get tearful when I've downed a drink or two. I'm one of your talking wounded. I'm a hostage. I'm maroonded. But I'm in Paris with you. Yes I'm angry at the way I've been bamboozled And resentful at the mess that I've been through. I admit I'm on the rebound And I don't care where are  I'm in Paris with you.  Do you mind if we do   If we say sod off to sodding Notre Dame,  If we skip the Champs Elys&eacute;es  And remain here in this sleazy  Old hotel room  Doing this and that  To what and whom  Learning who you are,  Learning what I am. Don't talk to me of love. Let's talk of Paris, The little bit of Paris in our view. There's that crack across the ceiling And the hotel walls are peeling And I'm in Paris with you. Don't talk to me of love. Let's talk of Paris. I'm in Paris with the slightest thing you do. I'm in Paris with your eyes, your mouth, I'm in Paris with ... all points south. Am I embarrassing you? I'm in Paris with you.
Now as I travel along the northern marshes To a winter of slag and frozen mountains I remember chiefly an undated evening Standing at a window that looked across to Wales  The shadows hanging like bats in the virginia creeper, Tomatoes redder than the brick they grew against, The dunce-caps of convolvulus lying on the coke, It seemed then that the pith and pride of England Was ripening like a peach upon the stable wall, With none to gather it, none to treasure it, For the labourer's hands were bound or cut from the wrist. There was much else also ready to be remembered  The September sun as hot as a kiss of parting, The autumn songs of the chiffchaff and the chaffinch, The herald moth like a withered leaf, the blue Earrings of bilberries on the tiny lobes of the leaves. The comic victorian house, Where Mrs. Radcliffe haunts the hearth like a downdraught, I therefore leave to you who already have so much, Holding in your arms the wind that blows from Wales And sings like a wren in the frosty trees, Holding the sunlight and the wild birds' fruit, Elderberry, cranberry, crabapple, hip and sloe, Holding the healed and healthy limbs of children, Laughing at the future in four acres of beans and chickens. You know so much that is half-forgotten now  The nudge of the catkin beneath the drying leaf, The spring intentions of the swallow, the fantastic Sting of love in the blood, the brutal wooing of God. And so I leave you To hoard the bright pods of a dying summer In the brown and poignant winter of this war.
The earth is what salivates, what sticks like a new glue. It is to walk on, it is to lie down in, A sure sheet for the resurrection. The earth is what follows you, Tracing your footsteps, counting your teeth, father And son, father and grandson, A knife, a seed, each planted just deep enough. You start there. The birds from your sleeve burst into flame; Your shoes catch fire, your good shoes; Your socks sink in the dirt, all pain gone; Your ankles sink in the dirt, your shinbones, your legs ... Necessity's after-breeder, Inflamed like asparagus in the night field, You try for the get-away by the light of yourself.
The fighter moves on the runway, a focus of blur, A buzzing bloom to the watchers, prior as a child's First sense of consciousness. It lifts away, Sustained in a kind of continuous miracle. Retracting wheels declare an independence. The pilot at one stroke moves from will to act, From desire to fulfillment: his dream is crowned with machine guns. But the watchers are aware of something moving Which subsists always on their margin of fear Yet always eludes them, like a question never asked. Perhaps it is because they are denied purgation, The necessary catharsis, being both actors and spectators? Their climates of opinion wither in the pilot's Absolute zero. Fulfillment is never allowed them: They imagine they are figures in another's nightmare. Compelling and static as hallucination, The plane carries their eyes up and over the bay. To call the pilot now they would need a new language, For while their eyes still hang on the tail assembly The prop is already entering a different world.
Have you missed something lately  Say, a great purpose humming in full accord to its necessary end? Or a wild stinging sweetness pulsing like a struck gong of obscure gold? Or God's blind eye pullulating out of the blue? Well here it is hung from a branch the moment before history begins and the homely labors of the hive.
&lsquo;A matter of chance?&rsquo; &lsquo;All right for the lucky. For those born blind, those whom the crab mumbles.&rsquo; &lsquo;A design, then?&rsquo; &lsquo;Not orientated manward.&rsquo; &lsquo;Are you brave? Is life but a sea, golden- winged, moulting upon our shores to develop new feathers for its meaningless returns?&rsquo; &lsquo;You would persuade me toward God.&rsquo; &lsquo;What God? Are we apparel of his wardrobe, clothes to be worn an hour in a procession and cast off?&rsquo; &lsquo;You make a mountain of a concept. Why is there not level ground, where the rankness of evil falls to our paternosters?&rsquo; &lsquo;You derive vocabulary from the Schoolmen. Omnipotence is no answer to secondary causation.&rsquo; &lsquo;All right, I allow you your mountain, if you will allow me that the cloud at its summit is what God withdraws into at the moment of illumination.&rsquo;
In Bethlehem on a Christmas night All around the Child shone a holy light. All around His head was a halo bright On a Christmas night. &ldquo;We have no room,&rdquo; the innkeeper called, So the glory fell where the cows were stalled, But among the guests were Three Kings who called On a Christmas night. How can it be such a light shines here In this humble stable once cold and drear? Oh, the Child has come to bring good cheer On a Christmas night! And what is the name of the little One? His name is Jesus He's God's own Son. Be happy, happy, everyone On a Christmas night!
Every day that I go out to my car I walk through a garden and wish often that Aristotle had gone on to a consideration of the dithyrambic poem or that his notes had survived Coarse grass mars the fine lawn as I look about right and left tic toc  And right and left the leaves upon the yearling peach grow along the slender stem No rose is sure. Each is one rose and this, unlike another, opens flat, almost as a saucer without a cup. But it is a rose, rose pink. One can feel it turning slowly upon its thorny stem
A friend tells me of soup kitchens and his work with the dying, those whose eyes are bulbous with fear of the here and beyond. &ldquo;It's not all in India,&rdquo; he says, and I agree (though thinking of Calcutta), and I give him ten bucks to help maintain a hospice where all are kept well off the floor, in crank beds angled like ski runs with lots to read, ice cream on demand, flowers in light and abundance all higher than the stone and dirt floors Calcutta nuns stoop to. But there's never a hug in this hospice run out of two zoned neighborhoods! For that it would take Mother Teresa or some other saint, lifting a burden in such a way that Love could be said to triumph, while Death is not denied the ecstasy it longs for.
In times of stormy weather She felt queer pain That said, &ldquo;You'll find rain better Than shelter from the rain.&rdquo; Days filled with fiery sunshine Strange hurt she knew That made Her seek the burning sunlight Rather than the shade. In months of snowy winter When cozy houses hold, She'd break down doors To wander naked In the cold.
<> Will I be free as the herring gulls are free? Or will I go down with the rest of the watersoaked wood Whithersoever the current may carry me? Will I strike out for a surf-ringed shoal and lie All day in a cleft of broken rock to watch The gulls swing slant-winged over my head and cry Until at last I am one with them and their brood? Or will I drop down over twisted willow roots, Over black sands and heaps of mussel shells Out to the stakes where the fishermen draw their catch, Lie tangled there on the backs of wallowing swells? No matter. Lift up the gates. I must be gone. Let me hear the creak of the capstan, the tread of boots Where the men go round. Let this lake and this sky be one With myself, whether flotsam or gull, and alone!
I journey through drafts of an old poem &amp; find an image that draws us together in absence  brambles, stray on the banks of the Blackwood, yielding sweet fruit though rolling in bitter-sweet coils choking the forest, closing life out, unravelling like watchsprings sprung from their casings &amp; left to corrode &amp; collect on the workshop floor. But you, who cleared your property with the slasher to prevent the council dousing it with poison, are no longer here, while we, fruit gatherers &amp; lovers of thorn &amp; confusion reminisce over blackberrying &amp; life in the shack at a time when absence was simply distance.
Grandfather chose a name  Lan Ping  and laid out clean bands of cloth while she waded ankle-deep in yellow mud. When he called, her hair swung over melonshells, a white boat, clay horses, one shoe. This high-necked dress attended her, her thighs whispering so privately she dared not look up. A drizzle  blue windowbeads chattering over the organized wrongdoing of the fuchsia sweating on her nightstand. He tightened thick bandages toe to heel and turned from her stare. Taught her to paint not the leaves but the spaces between the leaves.
As the tide rises, the closed mollusc Opens a fraction to the ocean's food, Bathed in its riches. Do not ask What force would do, or if force could. A knife is of no use against a fortress. You might break it to pieces as gulls do. No, only the rising tide and its slow progress Opens the shell. Lovers, I tell you true. You who have held yourselves closed hard Against warm sun and wind, shelled up in fears And hostile to a touch or tender word  The ocean rises, salt as unshed tears. Now you are floated on this gentle flood That cannot force or be forced, welcome food Salt as your tears, the rich ocean's blood, Eat, rest, be nourished on the tide of love.
There is no dendron of communication And roads are falling into disrepair. Muddy pools in that countryside Are mirrors for the laggard serving girls That tin clocks never wake Till the Don Old noble ape, fed at the breasts of cows Putting the great horn to his lips, blows such a blast That all the dewdrops down the valley of thorns Shake ... shake ... are almost shaken off. There are libraries of sonnets, Of algebra, of the decaying moon. Not an hour passes, but some fly Crawls through the withered calyx of a flower Dried in the prevailing wind. One cheek is shaved One waits the razor And soft rain falls in grass the grows on clay.
Climbed uphill to the seashore summerhouse, Domed and shingled cottage occupied By certain predecessors in whose pots Our porridge bubbles merrily. The waves Crash beyond the windows. Without ceremony They pack their things and are about to go. Well, we will soon forget them walking Dourly without shadows two by two. It's our vacation, sheets dried in the sun  Out from the floorboard, underneath the bed With slightest scrape of scale on wooden grain The flattened head of a silent copperhead  A kitchen cleaver leaps into my hand, Shining through the high song of your fear The whacking silver arc of light descends And head rolls, chomping, and the lithe And lovely diamonds down the back writhe. He, he, tall, returns, removes A curved and grooved tooth and squeezes it Into my palm. &lsquo;Here, it's yours now.&rsquo; &lsquo;Thanks, But might I not, as a memento, keep The head?&rsquo; &lsquo;Oh, no, there's poison in the fangs.&rsquo; And now he's dropped the snake into his thermos Of iced tea (&lsquo;The place is yours&rsquo;) and driven Down the sinuous twisting distant road. And we've the sunny, salty, freshened air And wind-dried linen sheets to spread.
<> <> you think. But you were them, each one of them, you with your sickle and your moons and the oaten hophead summer nights of prairie towns, the cars! The cars greasing through the dusty streets, the only fluid thing is tail light till your sister who waits on tables in the Mexican restaurant finally gets rid of her beery swains and comes home you hear her coming up the wooden steps that climb behind the trellis zotzed with roses (purple fuddles now at midnight, you hear their colors) her flat shoes chipping up the sounding wood, she steps onto the second story porch and taps at the screen door to let you know she's coming before she opens and comes in and slings her backpack on the cat. Who does not particularly move. You raise your eyes from the book you are not reading. You will never read again. You will belong to cottonwoods, to dust and muddy knees, you will pray to those gods, the empty ones who made a world that looks like them, and you look at her wondering: is this really me? Is she even herself? She is always too tired to explain what happened. You are finished with the earth and are too tired to be sky.
Around the cuffs and neck at least two thousand pearls or beads to fix by hand. Each line is threaded, double tied  one broken link will turn the church into a roller-skating rink. And anyway, the dress is not for me to see; you have it covered in a second skin, a bag, and reach inside to go on patiently transplanting from the never-ending jar of pearls or beads. You could be peeling prawns, or shelling peas.
There have been so many gods that now there are none. When the One God made a monopoly of it He wore us out, so now we are godless and unbelieving. Yet, O my young men, there is a vivifier. There is that which makes us eager. While we are eager, we think nothing of it. Sum, ergo non cogito. But when our eagerness leaves us, we are godless and full  of thought. We have worn out the gods, and they us. That pale one, filled with renunciation and pain and white  love has worn us weary of renunciation and love and even pain. That strong one, ruling the universe with a rod of iron has sickened us thoroughly with rods of iron and rulers  and strong men. The All-wise has tired us of wisdom. The weeping mother of god, inconsolable over her son makes us prefer to be womanless, rather than be wept over. And that poor late makeshift, Aphrodite emerging in a  bathing-suit from our modern sea-side foam has successfully killed all desire in us whatsoever. Yet, O my young men, there is a vivifier. There is a swan-like flame that curls round the centre of  space and flutters at the core of the atom, there is a spiral flame-tip that can lick our little atoms into  fusion so we roar up like bonfires of vitality and fuse in a broad hard flame of many men in a oneness. O pillars of flame by night, O my young men spinning and dancing like flamey fire-spouts in the dark  ahead of the multitude! O ruddy god in our veins, O fiery god in our genitals! O rippling hard fire of courage, O fusing of hot trust when the fire reaches us, O my young men! And the same flame that fills us with life, it will dance and  burn the house down, all the fittings and elaborate furnishings and all the people that go with the fittings and the  furnishings, the upholstered dead that sit in deep arm-chairs.
kept coming back because of the softness of our skin knew what would become of us &amp; now while the night flamed down in Boston it was morning on the other side of New York &amp; the softness of our skin knew what it had come for the risk was terrible &amp; all our joy this was the classical story (pigeons &amp; child murderers in the park) &amp; meant that literacy gives an awful power o cavatina of our sickness o stretched out lyric of our shared pathologies our! (Rockies &amp; false syntax) ocean! indecent pacific! my body naked under leather crushed in the machine it had always become back in the days I knew us the sea was wet the sea made certain specific philosophies of roses flourish at the edge of itself metropolis of waves unsymmetrical wave of our most rigid sleep &amp; we were wary of the undertow ride with it we said fall into its own security rhythm rhythm we kept remembering it was our passion to do things at the surface of our skin &amp; would not have thought to mention it again except pornography is the cure for war it is a branch in february &amp; it commits adultery even a little while after the sun rises our acts with one another are sheathed in ice namelessly shining baffled by adverbs our orgasms wait for us at the end of the world our speech says the breast of the newfallen snow an old story talks about three drops of blood upon it like the cheeks of an almost remembered lover feverish in the diseased dismembered memory as if our abstract earth put on flesh sometimes or as it really is that I came here from some other City stood naked among travelers at the terminal and my only speech was blood.
Fountain of life whose face we love, The leper, healed, gives thanks to Thee. His eyes are fixed, and will not move From that clear spring which makes him see. He heard Thy words, he turned his feet; He passed the impulsive, pressing crowd. His fingers touched the watery sheet. He found Thee there, and cried aloud. Life, the reward, was not denied To one for whom no men gave place. They who pressed nearest in their pride Were not the first to see Thy face. Our lives run counter to the wheel, Nor may the soul find peace, unless It wait on God, whose words reveal Clear waters which alone can bless. Those merchants trading doves for gold Turned from the leper's gift aside. Life was the bargain which they sold, But he found life where most he died. Lead us to grace; let stream and dove Alter our lives, by shock revealed. Shine, risen Christ: perfect our love. Raise us from death, and find us healed.
You cannot go back now to that innocence  the pure pain that enters like a sword making the bright blood flow and the slow perfect healing, leaving you whole. This is a deeper illness, a poison that has entered every tissue: Cut off your hand, you will not find it there. This must be met and conquered in each separate atom, must be lived out like a slow fever. No part is mortally afflicted. Each part will have its convalescence surely, and yet you will arise from this infection changed, as one returns from death.
Husband These poems are your rival. They undress me. They keep me up nights. Turn my eyes to soft fruits ripe and realized. Husband These poems are my best friend. They listen to my monotony, my unceasing repeating. Against their patience I can never sin. Husband These poems are my passionate suitor. They go down on one knee. They beg me, &ldquo;Marry me. Marry me.&rdquo; I find I give them my hand. Husband This could be exciting: poems&amp;me, you&amp;me, M&eacute;nage &agrave; trois. Permanently, Happily. Husband Is a woman poet permitted bigamy? Husband Answer me!
Is he dead then for all the rain, is the priest remembering his breakfast and spooning wet earth on the noisy wood in the gaping tenement below? Snout of the coffin tight round him, trumpet call, middle C closing in, whistle and sock full of flour, gunnysacks wrapped around your legs, feathers in your dear hair, an indian, raindrops pelt on elmwood of the box? Whose hedge so drenched in April by what church's graveyard? Who is wood? The tin cock on the steeple tells his ordinary lie. The wind will never blow again.
Let me dream a while; the day is done; Let me drift away in Charon's barge; Moonlight pours upon the Isle of Love; There the pleasure fairies rove at large; Mab and sweet Titania are there, Oberon and Puck, that rogue of night, Garbed in wings that dropped from butter- flies, Ere the sun began to lose its light. There the poets play on golden lyres, And the shepherds, with their oaten reeds, Sailing down the silver stream of song, Change to angel flight the lover's deeds; Like a mystic panorama show, All the world of fancy comes to night; Like a fading panorama show, Dances here the minstrel and the sprite. All the world's a dream, but men are mists; All this living but a fading dream; Life is merely night to Heaven's day; We are merely grasping for the gleam That, when morning comes in form of Death, Shall be shining on the distant isle, Clothed in all the splendor of the sun,  Clothed in all the splendor of His smile.
It was drizzling at Woolwich Arsenal. I buttoned up my jacket by the stairs. The sky went up like acid-drops, and brume stood shining on the floor. The ticket-room whitened down my back, and Beresford Square was lit by rain all down the milk wet wall. I saw the New Road houses, like torn tin, jiggered at their chimneys and look dark and orange lines of light squeezed on the roofs as far as Barrack Field. I saw them move, the dead things light, wind, rain around Gun Park, uncapped, not true. My jacket was too thin. Up from the civil offing pricked a crane which down a mustard bath of cloud unspun two girders to Grand Depot Road, and crowned their supplication from the Underground, their cruck and upright arms, with nails. The sun went out. I watched them building through the rain. Something was born: some bolt, black anchorite. I waited for the bus. Next year, when spring remakes the light, wind, rain, and lays Blue Gate with short, distracted bice and duplicates our paper-dressing of the bone, this thing will run, unfallen, in our salt delights. I sat upstairs. At Shooters Hill I saw, beside me, dancing on the second floor of some hotel. The moon came out again and whitened down the roofs of Marlborough Lane. I buttoned up my jacket by the door. I do not like high spirits anymore.
Today outside your prison I stand  and rattle my walking stick: Prisoners, listen; you have relatives outside. And there are thousands of ways to escape. Years ago I bent my skill to keep my cell locked, had chains smuggled to me in pies, and shouted my plans to jailers; but always new plans occurred to me, or the new heavy locks bent hinges off, or some stupid jailer would forget and leave the keys. Inside, I dreamed of constellations  those feeding creatures outlined by stars, their skeletons a darkness between jewels, heroes that exist only where they are not. Thus freedom always came nibbling my thought, just as often, in light, on the open hills  you can pass an antelope and not know and look back, and then even before you see  there is something wrong about the grass. And then you see. That's the way everything in the world is waiting. Now these few more words, and then I'm gone: Tell everyone just to remember their names, and remind others, later, when we find each other. Tell the little ones to cry and then go to sleep, curled up where they can. And if any of us get lost, if any of us cannot come all the way  remember: there will come a time when all we have said and all we have hoped will be all right. There will be that form in the grass.
There was, at the end, a look of great peace on my father's face at the moment of his death. At the memorial service my cousin tells this story to us as a way to infer a last-minute salvation, a meeting of Jesus in the middle of the air, this being, after all, the AME Zionist church across from the vacant lot that used to be the elementary school me and my sister attended. This is the part of the service where we stand up for him, this small knot of family and friends in a very large room. He's gone and left my mother with nothing. Her name isn't on the deed to the house, her name never appears on his policies. Her mind's confused, she can't take care of herself by herself, and I'm having a real hard time convincing various agencies that she even exists. Which is why there is no casket to bear. Too expensive, we decide, money to be better spent on the living, on my mother. Still, we give him a family send-off.  <> <> the roof he put over our heads, for staying when a lot of other men took a look at their wives, their babies, their house bills and changed their names to fare-thee-well. And then my sister stands up, stands up through the pain and accidents of first born, first torn, stands up, the family's &ldquo;bad girl,&rdquo; the willful daughter, low-down spirit of red dresses and iodine, my sister stands up in a way I can't fully explain, but know belongs to black women, she stands up and declares, <> <>
The very first baby that ever I met was my brother Jimmy now a professor He was two years old I was aged nil and he seemed about the size of a Welsh   dresser I lay there blowing gripe-water bubbles and remarked that if it'd make him happy I'd stick to the arts, he could have science then he kicked me up the nappy Years of fraternal feuding flew by, with battles only I and he know, When I was an addict of  Till I became the teenager responsible for Esher Surrey Gents Inscriptions While Jimmy was sent by King George the Six to pacify the Egyptians And when he came back we liked each other, we were friends, even good friends   maybe But I still recalled his resemblance to Cain when he was a two-year-old baby And my anti-infant prejudice induced me to prefer alligators To the gurgling and talcumed menaces who inhabit perambulators Then Jimmy met Anne, they married each other coincidences never cease  They were so fond of me they went out of their way to manufacture me a niece  All my fear of babies folded away, for she was a heart-leaping sight She fitted perfectly into my arms and her hair was bright as the light. I worshipped the ground she wobbled upon but I was one of a congregation Of dedicated Ruth worshippers in a circle of adoration At four years old on my lap in a car she improvised a four-hour song Which I nicked and stuck in a poem of mine (but I cut it to two minutes long) Never more never more will she sit on my lap though now she is lovelier still For Ruth, who makes angels look dowdy, is now Mrs Pickersgill. To her and Nigel laughter, joy, great happiness and peace And please to supply a great nephew or preferably a great niece.
breathe with me this fear (which beyond night shall go) remembering only dare (Wholly consider how these immaculate thin things half daemon half tree among sunset dream acute from root to leaf) but should voices(whom, lure an eagerest strict flame) demand the metaphor of our projectile am tell such to murder time (forgetting what's to know wholly imagining fire) only consider How
Let's consider the problem of perspective. The theater has yet to solve this matter. The props have been carefully arranged so that the Greek ruins grow smaller and the floor descends as the scene stretches away from the audience. This way the actor exiting appears to be swallowed by dis- tance. The problem begins when the actor and the ruins can go no further. Here the illusion loses its power. The actor is still too tall to appear distant. The scene is one of a terribly perplexed giant. The audience feels embarrassed for the ac- tor. The actor swears he will not return to the stage. This is fear: a man with no place to go, a conflict he can't possibly resolve, a helpless and rather unsympathetic audience. Except for those in the mezzanine, whose unique perspective never allows them the luxury of illusion. Their applause is not in honor of magic. This is where the actor looks at the end of each curtain call.
Limits: distance and near edge. Here you are contained, and yet hills and trees delineate a further world. The curtains know their place and hesitate, held back, restrained: open doors are the best we can hope for. But listen. Don't turn. There is another distance within where the eye shapes, translating image into imagery: beyond the curtains, casting a separate glance and now a shadow within shadow. Being and seeing are more than the best we could hope for: now all the generous light is yours. On the terrace you keep distance and edge in sight and are them, contained: see how the shadows bend towards you.
The little man who looks for waterfalls, whose ears are long, whose hands are small and icy, who's here one minute gone the next like light; who hides himself in passage-ways in hillsides to offer up his face to wandering snails, wants to be alone with me. I know that. To lie beside me in the dead of night like ash out late shifting its pink fur on beds of rock we'll watch the moon rise from  deafened by the elongated lake that doesn't know what else to do but fall.
Through the emerald- ringed neck of a pheasant I watch your inauspicious concern. The gravel road smells like bacon at night. Your barn is built on stilts. There is a lantern; that is your eye. I am sorry my car is wavering. It hauls me. I am not in control anymore. That is not a lake. That is not hay. You have to watch me do this to myself now. Where is my hair going? Swaddled in wood, do you accept apologies?
Thinking of shores that I shall never see, And things that I would know but am forbid By Time and briefness, treasuries locked from me In unknown tongue or human bosom hid, Knowing how unsure is all my knowledge, doled To sloven memory and to cheated sense, And to what majesty of stars I hold My little candle of experience In the vast night, in the untravelled night, I sigh and seek. And there is answer none But in the silence that sure pressure slight Of your heart beating close beside my own. O Love, Love, where in you is any bound? Fool I to seek, who have infinitely found.
Have you forgotten the sweetness of women, Their treble cries, the underworld of milk? How in the fleshy inside of an elbow The warm hollow trembles with blue silk  All luscious opaque roundness in a blur Of bedroom coverlet, of rind and mound, Those supple thighs I nested in at twelve Whose milk-white forms melted the horizon's Aggregate of birds into empty distance. To walk by heavy mirrors of a myth With the greedy mouth everyone begins with And feed on nothing but the self reflected Is to know how pleasure ceases, does away with Savor, and the attributes of Eden End up in a darkroom of details, Or a day of too much light whose sun erases Privacies gone flat, communication A letter bomb arriving in the mails.
In the dusk of the evening When the goats come, Two pale ones nodding as they pass, Unattended, taking their time To graze by the curve, Its sharpness indicated by a broken arrow, In the last bit of daylight, I saw a blonde little girl step Out of nowhere, and bow to them, stiffly, As one does at the conclusion of a school play, And disappear, pinafore and all, In the bushes, so that I sat On my porch, dumbfounded... The goats' intermittent tinkle Growing fainter and fainter, And then hushing, as if on cue, For the whippoorwill to take over, Briefly, in the giant maple. Child! I thought of calling out, Knowing myself a born doubter.
<> A certain square of leaf and loam, A certain hillside's tawny swell, Arbitrarily called home. The river that you cleave apart Today with hasty, heedless stride May fling a coil about your heart That you can never toss aside. The aspen leaves that lift so thin A web against the waning day May weave a net to bind you in Time cannot wither or tear away. The hill you climb so laughingly, Plundering all its meager lore, May heap upon your memory More weight of woe than Atlas bore. A heart's a brittle thing at best, And easily reft as you may learn Should yours be drawn to east or west, Somewhere your feet may not return. Oh, better far be wise and cold; Go warily, nor pause too much, Lest a mere cubicle of mould Should take your life within its clutch. Or give allegiance to the skies, That you may ride the wind like foam Yet only need to lift your eyes For candle and hearth to light you home.
Oh what a pity, Oh! don't you agree that figs aren't found in the land of the free! Fig-trees don't grow in my native land; there's never a fig-leaf near at hand when you want one; so I did without; and that is what the row's about. Virginal, pure policemen came and hid their faces for very shame, while they carried the shameless things away to gaol, to be hid from the light of day. And Mr Mead, that old, old lily said: &ldquo;Gross! coarse! hideous!&rdquo; and I, like a silly, thought he meant the faces of the police-court officials, and how right he was, and I signed my initials to confirm what he said; but alas, he meant my pictures, and on the proceedings went. The upshot was, my picture must burn that English artists might finally learn when they painted a nude, to put a  a cache sexe, a cache sexe, or else begone! A fig-leaf; or, if you cannot find it a wreath of mist, with nothing behind it. A wreath of mist is the usual thing in the north, to hide where the turtles sing. Though they never sing, they never sing, don't you dare to suggest such a thing or Mr Mead will be after you.  But what a pity I never knew A wreath of English mist would do as a cache sexe! I'd have put a whole fog. But once and forever barks the old dog, so my pictures are in prison, instead of in the Zoo.
They were waiting here to say This is the way it is This is the way I came bawling into their domain Of harsher light Remembering a place Of purer light and messages Passed across a darkened transom From that place Remembering They said this is the way it is In this light this dust This scuffle for the scraps, bad blood Between unequalsYou'll get wise You can break Your heart against stones here Remembering. Counsellors, betake your Covenants of convenience To a place of stones, I Must lift the shadow of each shadow To find the dooryard To that place.
I would like to be a white man, wouldn't you? There's so many lovely things that I could do. I could lynch a Negro  And never go to jail, you know, I would love to be a white man, wouldn't you? I would love to be a white man, wouldn't you? So many tasty things that I could do. I could tell the starving Indian nation To go straight to damnation, Oh, I would love to be a white man, wouldn't you? I would love to be a white man, wouldn't you? There's such intriguing things that one could do. I could say to Stalin, listen kid, You're just an Asiatic mongrel Red. Ah, I would love to be a white man, wouldn't you? I would love to be a white woman also, too. There's so many cultural things that I could do. I could belong to the D.A.R. Tell Marian Anderson, stay ... out the D.A.R.! I could ADORE being a white woman, wouldn't you? I'd love to be a white congressman, too. There's so many helpful things I could do. Just to get the Negro's goat I wouldn't let NO soldiers vote. I would love to be a white congressman, wouldn't you? Oh, I'd love to be a white Christian, ain't it true. I'd act just like my fellow Christians do. For Jesus I would search With no black folks in my church. Amen, I'd love to be a white man, wouldn't you? Halleloo! ... O Halleloo ... Hallelloo-o-o
I wanted to know my mother when she sat looking sad across the campus in the late 20's into the future of the soul, there were black angels straining above her head, carrying life from our ancestors, and knowledge, and the strong nigger feeling. She sat (in that photo in the yearbook I showed Vashti) getting into new blues, from the old ones, the trips and passions showered on her by her own. Hypnotizing me, from so far ago, from that vantage of knowledge passed on to her passed on to me and all the other black people of our time. When I die, the consciousness I carry I will to black people. May they pick me apart and take the useful parts, the sweet meat of my feelings. And leave the bitter bullshit rotten white parts alone.
Where the violet shadows brood  Under cottonwoods and beeches,  Through whose leaves the restless reaches Of the river glance, I 've stood,  While the red-bird and the thrush  Set to song the morning hush. There, when wakening woods encroach  On the shadowy winding waters,  And the bluets, April's daughters, At the darling Spring's approach,  Star their myriads through the trees,   All the land is one with peace. Under some imposing cliff,  That, with bush and tree and boulder,  Thrusts a gray, gigantic shoulder O'er the stream, I 've oared a skiff,  While great clouds of iceberg hue  Lounged along the noonday blue. There, when harvest heights impend  Over shores of rippling summer,  And to greet the fair new-comer,  June, the wildrose thickets bend  In a million blossoms dressed,   All the land is one with rest. On some rock, where gaunt the oak  Reddens and the sombre cedar  Darkens, like a sachem leader, I have lain and watched the smoke  Of the steamboat, far-away,  Trailed along the dying day. There, when margin waves reflect  Autumn colors, gay and sober,  And the Indian-girl, October, Wampum-like in berries decked,  Leans above the leaf-strewn streams,   All the land is one with dreams. Through the bottoms where, out-tossed  By the wind's wild hands, ashiver  Bend the willows o'er the river, I have walked in sleet and frost,  While beneath the cold round moon,  Frozen, gleamed the long lagoon. There, when leafless woods uplift  Spectral arms the storm-blasts splinter,  And the hoary trapper, Winter, Builds his camp of ice and drift,  With his snow-pelts furred and shod,   All the land is one with God.
Tom Mooney! Tom Mooney! Tom Mooney! A man with the title of governor has spoken: And you do not go free. A man with the title of governor has spoken: And the steel bars surround you, And the prison walls wrap you about, And you do not go free. But the man with the title of governor Does not know That all over the earth today The workers speak the name: Tom Mooney! Tom Mooney! Tom Mooney! And the sound vibrates in waves From Africa to China, India to Germany, Russia to the Argentine, Shaking the bars, Shaking the walls, Shaking the earth Until the whole world falls into the hands of The workers. Of course, the man with the title of governor Will be forgotten then On the scrap heap of time  He won't matter at all. But remembered forever will be the name: TOM MOONEY. Schools will be named: TOM MOONEY. Farms will be named: TOM MOONEY. Dams will be named: TOM MOONEY. Ships will be named: TOM MOONEY. Factories will be named: TOM MOONEY. And all over the world  Banner of force and labor, strength and union, Life forever through the workers' power  Will be the name: TOM MOONEY.
One cannot now help thinking how much better it would have been if Vronsky and Anna Karenin had stood up for themselves, and seen Russia across her crisis, instead of leaving it to Lenin. The big, flamboyant Russia might have been saved, if a pair of rebels like Anna and Vronsky had blasted the sickly air of Dostoevsky and Tchekov, and spy-government everywhere. But Tolstoi was a traitor to the Russia that needed him most, the clumsy, bewildered Russia so worried by the Holy Ghost. He shifted his job on to the peasants and landed them all on toast. Dostoevsky, the Judas, with his sham christianity epileptically ruined the last bit of sanity left in the hefty bodies of the Russian nobility. So our goody-good men betray us and our sainty-saints let us down, and a sickly people will slay us if we touch the sob-stuff crown of such martyrs; while Marxian tenets naturally take hold of the town. Too much of the humble Willy wet-leg and the holy can't-help-it touch, till you've ruined a nation's fibre and they loathe all feeling as such, and want to be cold and devilish hard like machines and you can't wonder much.
Poverty is a stranger now. The mangy dog his friend stands on two hind legs with a soup-can in his mouth to beg with him. After watching pilgrims pass him by, poverty blinds his eyes so his status as a beggar rises. He breaks the dog's front legs to raise the pitch of pity. I knew him once. On the veranda where I lived in a blanket, his dog would wake me with licks on my sleepy face while he smoked his first bidis. My eyes wear trifocals so I can read small print and large, distinguish several species of spiders I'm scared of. My dog is on a diet because he has gout. Poverty is a stranger.
The roses mourn for her who sleeps  Within the tomb; For her each lily-flower weeps  Dew and perfume. In each neglected flower-bed Each blossom droops its lovely head,  They miss her touch, they miss her tread,  Her face of bloom,  Of happy bloom. The very breezes grieve for her,  A lonely grief; For her each tree is sorrower,  Each blade and leaf. The foliage rocks itself and sighs, And to its woe the wind replies,  They miss her girlish laugh and cries,  Whose life was brief,  Was all too brief. The sunlight, too, seems pale with care,  Or sick with woe; The memory haunts it of her hair,  Its golden glow. No more within the bramble-brake The sleepy bloom is kissed awake  The sun is sad for her dear sake,  Whose head lies low,  Lies dim and low. The bird, that sang so sweet, is still  At dusk and dawn; No more it makes the silence thrill  Of wood and lawn. In vain the buds, when it is near, Open each pink and perfumed ear,  The song it sings she will not hear  Who now is gone,  Is dead and gone. Ah, well she sleeps who loved them well,  The birds and bowers; The fair, the young, the lovable,  Who once was ours. Alas! that loveliness must pass! Must come to lie beneath the grass! That youth and joy must fade, alas!  And die like flowers,  Earth's sweetest flowers!
Taught to be glib on time patient all things unnatural, you traverse papers morning news background music to the fact wrecking crew as deadly as carcinoma. With a change of clothes in the office closet and facemasks of words in books you glide in the space inertia calls without a song. Suddenly as the tree inside you without water, the roots only as deep as your groin you have nothing to say. As in framed tales from the ancients you begin saying it in your head best place for it nothing for the mandible of the page.
Filled with a curious ecstasy she discovers a hut in the forest covered with dead leaves. To her knock nothing but a bird or scuttling sounds in the leaves. &ldquo;Who is there?&rdquo; she asks as if she were the visited interior. No answer relieves her embarrassment. &ldquo;Why have I come? Is there anybody I really want to know?&rdquo; Silence. Then there was a man regarding her from nowhere, she could not place his ground, he fascinated her briefly by his independence of being anywhere at all. He was firm but shadowy, his voice was heavy, as if he lifted it from that same uncertain floor. &ldquo;I will tell you why you've come. I have called you by speaking into my own bones, my deft fingers found you between my thighs, and pulled you, slow as flowers are supposed to grow, down into this daylight. I am the unreliable one in the heart of the wood  come give me pleasure.&rdquo; His thick meaning moistened itself then in her mouth. He too was from heaven, was waiting for the earth to open at last, to be done with it. To be done with it forever, and go home.
Poplar and oak awake all night. And through all weathers of the days of the year. There is a consciousness undefined. Yesterday's twilight, August almost over, lasted, slowly changing, until daybreak. Human sounds were shut behind curtains. No human saw the night in this garden, sliding blue into morning. Only the sightless trees, without braincells, lived it and wholly knew it.
Delivers from distances of wood, dumptruck squalling, a nation of red dirt wedged in its seams, the hoist's screech a child abandoned under big shirts flapping on a line. Good mix, the black countryman says, stooped at his rig. God's plenty of heat in that heavy log. Feel it, meaning my wife, her kind always tells, city or country, don't matter. Stacking steadily, shirt off, brown as a pine, he's a rooster at work, chattering a country's need, lateborn mouths that wait. I imagine the shadows he's cut in their place. He warns me it's the hardheads hold out the longest, wedged in like family. And sweetly keep the hearth blessed.
Your eyes, those pools with soft rushes, O prodigal and wholly dilatory lady, Come now, when will they restore me The orient moon of my dapper affections? For imminent is that moment when, Because of your perverse austerities, My crisp soul will be flooded by a languor Bland as the wide gaze of a Newfoundland. Ah, madame! truly it's not right When one isn't the real Gioconda, To adaptate her methods and deportment For snaring the poor world in a blue funk. Ah! the divine infatuation That I nurse for Cydalise Now that she has fled the capture Of my lunar sensibility! True, I nibble at despondencies Among the flowers of her domain To the sole end of discovering What is her unique propensity!  Which is to be mine, you say? Alas, you know how much I oppose A stiff denial to postures That seem too much impromptu. Ah! without the moon, what white nights, What nightmares rich with ingenuity! Don't I see your white swans there? Doesn't someone come to turn the knob? And it's your fault that I'm this way. That my conscience sees double, And my heart fishes in troubled water For Eve, Gioconda, and Dalila. Oh, by the infinite circumflex Of the archbeam of my cross-legged labours, Come now, appease me just a little With the why-and-wherefore of Your Sex!
The door of winter is frozen shut, and like the bodies of long extinct animals, cars lie abandoned wherever the cold road has taken them. How ceremonious snow is, with what quiet severity it turns even death to a formal arrangement. Alone at my window, I listen to the wind, to the small leaves clicking in their coffins of ice.
&lsquo;Windows of the soul&rsquo;?  What a view! Looking out on slanting fields Where clover, plantain, timothy And stones Stand or bend to leeward in the breezes According to their natures, And the trees House chittering squirrels Beneath the altercations of the sky Prinked at dark By squints of far Aldebaron; Looking in, on nothing But what corresponds To this, as a swooping gull's the double In air of that white-bellied bird Swizzling under water Through the upsidedown clouds swaying Slightly in his graceful track Where the afternoon Has sighed and, breathing, langorously rumples The surface of the cove with ripples Not in the sky,  Or is the air, for being made of sky, A mirror that must magnify The brute images Cast upward by the sea?
<> <> <> And that was all the farewell when I parted from my dear. &lsquo;I will go where I am wanted, to a lady born and bred Who will dress me free for nothing in a uniform of red; She will not be sick to see me if I only keep it clean: I will go where I am wanted for a soldier of the Queen. &lsquo;I will go where I am wanted, for the sergeant does not mind; He may be sick to see me but he treats me very kind: He gives me beer and breakfast and a ribbon for my cap, And I never knew a sweetheart spend her money on a chap. &lsquo;I will go where I am wanted, where there's room for one or  two, And the men are none too many for the work there is to do; Where the standing line wears thinner and the dropping dead lie  thick; And the enemies of England they shall see me and be sick.&rsquo;
Sitting in the kitchen of a strange room surrounded by fixtures a window on my left window on my right the slow pouring of light into the room into my head filled with old wine the whole outdoors is ticking inside I feel as black as distant trees in the dead of night there's nowhere to go nothing to do I bolt for the door take to the streets down several pitchers of beer paint endless pictures of contentment while picking warm guitars munching bad food holding in my head cold hands to my hotheadedness.
<> The Power that frowns along the sky, To watch the Tree, and see that none Plucked of the fruit that grew thereon. There was a robber in the Tree, Who climbed as high as ever he Was able! At the top he knew The Apple of all Apples grew. The night was dark! The branch was thin! In every wind he heard the din Of angels calling Guardian, see That no man climbs upon the Tree  But when he saw me standing there He shook with terror and despair, Then I said to him Be at rest, The best to him who wants the best  So I was sacked! But I have got A job in hell to keep me hot!
siren people look in the wind fire's bigger than ambulance and now the fantastic cold come back from there what's time counted not slower quiet the snow windows chimney smoke going up the middleair the bulkcloudy
You have red toenails, chestnut hair on your calves, oh let me love you, the fathers are lingering in the background nodding assent. I dream of you shedding calico from slow-motion breasts, I dream of you leaving with skinny women, I dream you know. The fathers are nodding like overdosed lechers, the fathers approve with authority: Persian emperors, ordering that the sun shall rise every dawn, set each dusk. I dream. White bathroom surfaces rounded basins you stand among loosening hair, arms, my senses. The fathers are Dresden figurines vestigial, anecdotal small sculptures shaped by the hands of nuns. Yours crimson-tipped, take no part in that crude abnegation. Scarlet liturgies shake our room, amaryllis blooms in your upper thighs, water lily on mine, fervent delta the bed afloat, sheer linen billowing on the wind: Nile, Amazon, Mississippi.
Among things with souls, find me. Picking thru the alphabet or leaning out the window. (Lives and magic.) Old witch city, the lights and roads (floating) up near the tops of buildings. Electric names, which are not love's. A rolling Eastern distress. Water cutting the coast, lulling the mysterious classes. Murderers humming under the window. A strutting long headed Negro. Beneath the red silk of unique social fantasy. Shore invisible under tenements. The Jew who torments Hitler in Paradise, wiping thick fingers on a hospital cloth. His fingerprints on the dough, marking it before baking. Drifting to sleep in Pelham, fucking a female spy. This man was used against me, in a dream. Broken teeth Dirty apron Hires a bowery desperado, to pull out the garbage and imagine the whiteness of his wife's withered stomach. Ding The proportion of Magic has seeped so low. For the 1st person plural America, then, Atlantis, in blind overdose.
<>  It is because I would. I willed it. 'Tis no good To murmur or complain. I have not served the law That keeps the earth so fair And gives her clothes to wear, Raiment of joy and awe. For all that bow to bless That law shall sure abide. But man shall not abide, And hence his gloriousness. Lo, evening earth doth lie All-beauteous and all peace. Man only does not cease From striving and from cry. Sun sets in peace: and soon The moon will shower her peace. O law-abiding moon, You hold your peace in fee! Man, leastways, will not be Down-bounden to these laws. Man's spirit sees no cause To serve such laws as these. There yet are many seas For man to wander in. He yet must find out sin, If aught of pleasance there Remain for him to store, His rovings to increase, In quest of many a shore Forbidden still to fare. Peace sleeps the earth upon, And sweet peace on the hill. The waves that whimper still At their long law-serving (O flowing sad complaint!) Come on and are back drawn. Man only owns no king, Man only is not faint. You see, the earth is bound. You see, the man is free. For glorious liberty He suffers and would die. Grudge not then suffering Or chastisemental cry. O let his pain abound, Earth's truant and earth's king!
Mandevil's river of dry jewels grows Day-cycled, deathly, and iron-fruited trees; From Paradise it runs to Pantarose And with great waves into the gravely seas.  (Olympe, and Paradise Terrestre the same  Whence, bent to improve, King Alleluiah came  High (Higher, in fact, as Milton boasted) hurled  Clings to the cold slates of the Roof of the World.) Spears pierce its desert basin, the long dawn: Tower, noon, all cliquant, dock-side cranes, sag-fruited: And, sand-born weight, brief by waste sand upborne, Leave, gulfed, ere night, the bare plain, deeper rooted.  (Herr Trinckler, there of late, reports of these,  A million acres of dead poplar trees.  Well may new pit-heads to wise A appeal;  Our desolation is of harsher steel.) Antred, of malachite, its boulders thunder: Involve their cataracts, one known week-end: Then, deep, a labyrinth of landslides, under The gravely sea, and seen no more, descend.  (It is cracked mud the motor service dints;  Five clays, diluvian, covered some chipped flints.  Tour well the slag-heaps, royalty, we own  The arid sowing, the tumultuous stone.) Fish of another fashion the dry sea Ride: can blast through eddies, and sail on: Can rend the hunters whose nets drag the scree: Are full good savour: are for Prester John.  (Paradise, like Bohemia, has no coast;  Of bombs and bowlers it has power to boast,  But mail-dark fish, spawned in grit-silted grotto,  Adam comes here for; and recites my motto.)
<> When I was down and now I'm down  again! You mustn't take it bad, nor be dismayed To know that youngsters ought to help  old men, And 'tis their duty to do that: Amen! I have no cows, no sheep, no boots, no hat   The folk who gave me presents are all  dead, And all good luck died with them! Because  of that I won't pay what I owe you; but, instead, I'll owe you till the dead rise from the dead. You weave good shirts, and I weave, for  my bread, Good poetry But you get paid at times! The only rap I get is on my head: But when it comes again that men like  rhymes  And pay for them I'll pay you for your  shirt!
Beside an artificial lake, Upon a wooden bench constructed round a tree, We sat in silence, till she said: &lsquo;I like this traceryof leaves With moonlight coming through, And of course the moonlight on the water.&rsquo; I felt but did not say: &lsquo;Such romantic restfulness Your words induce, beside this artificial lake, I could, once I make the final choice, Forget our bonds and choose a common bond.&rsquo; A beggar's whine approached, his eyes Shone in the darkness, fixed on us; To make him go we gave him half an anna. But then another came, And a third from a little distance Watched us give the second half an anna. He lurched towards us, dragged one foot, And howled like a sick dog towards the moon. Thus ended what was ill begun. She lied to be with me. I lied to myself. We sought romantic restfulness. God sent three beggars. We went back to our separate bonds.
It's always too late for the October revolutions, failures lined up like Roman candles in the rain. They still come around begging for change. (So nothing works, not even disappointment's last good nerve? So the dead letter office returns his mail?) It's noon all afternoon, it's well this side of yesterday today.  but my radio's gone dead. My best friend said there might be work for me, my mother told me never argue with a white man, you'll never win that way. Not even the bus stops wait for me. The signs have all been taken down for repairs, no second person's loitered on that corner in decades: I couldn't even hail a taxi for you. Someone says &ldquo;Now you're asleep&rdquo; three hundred times until I believe it. (Imagination is a funny thing, good night Johnny Mercer. Maybe he should ask a fucking daisy what to do.) The walls are sweating whitewashed nails, the windows are raising my pain threshold, I must be asleep by now. The thick of it was summer floods and mildewed pages stuck together,  Parts One through Four; the thin was  <> in Iowa, it's thirteen o'clock on Thursday, and  <> with Matthew Broderick as Colonel Shaw, who made men out of a bunch of niggers, and a hailstone hit me on the head, my little piece of heaven or the end of fall. To tell the truth I saw it twice, but couldn't tell you when.
Ravenin Chiapas beak up open to flat white mexican light against which an arch is breaking its back to join the broken sky barbs of its feathers hang down, it cries out for a world full of carrion but its claws hold firm &amp; flat the top of the ruined sill wings tensed back it has swallowed its tongue in hunger to eat hunger to cry out loudinto the skyI am here feed me unmerciful gods who made us feed on shit feed me because I cry louder because these holy stones are dead &amp; the grey moss &amp; green fungus are dead in their pores because men mumble &amp; make the best of it, put up with what comes down soft &amp; they eat because I am alive &amp; make noise because I can crack the cheap bowl of your sky with my shriek because I care because I am hungry &amp; cry louder than any other.
I am in a hurry to decide two things: whether my amnesia has any color to it, whether the ghastly charity of hope is nothing more than that adjective I've chosen: ghastly. Because: my amnesia seems to have a desire to repeat itself, and in that form of repetition is not destined to be different than my prior lack of amnesia. In this case the amnesia may not even be mine, more or less some prolonged pattern, and in this case would have a color, something like magenta, some color perhaps slightly cooler than that. I can remember the magenta portrait in the cool hallway of my aunt's farmhouse, an old lady the portrait  probably of victorian times. The dark frame, so like the wooden banister of the stairwell. Passing it at night. Never fond of this thing for itself if anything it gave me the creeps but the passing itself becoming an act of location, an act of devotion, regardless of even any terror the portrait might bring to reign. Which brings me to the ghastliness of hope: which for some like myself used to abide in memory, or in amulets, or in the faces of others, arms of others, tales of their past and future others brought to me, and I listened. But hope was a wish somehow strangely avoiding any abiding in the present at bay out there, true abeyance, adrift, off the coast. I can feel the current of desire to go to that place as just such a ghastly hope. And the ghosts there of course. The fictions from the self:
<> There were people said, &ldquo;Gee, what a nag!&rdquo; And they were Edgar Allan Poe bugs and so They called him Remorse. When he was a gelding He flashed his heels to other ponies And threw dust in the noses of other ponies And won his first race and his second And another and another and hardly ever Came under the wire behind the other runners. And so, Remorse, who is gone, was the hero of a play By Henry Blossom, who is now gone. What is there to a monicker? Call me anything. A nut, a cheese, something that the cat brought in. Nick me with any old name. Class me up for a fish, a gorilla, a slant head, an egg, a ham. Only ... slam me across the ears sometimes ... and hunt for a white star In my forehead and twist the bang of my forelock around it. Make a wish for me. Maybe I will light out like a streak of wind.
The last arrival in the furthest country, All he saw he saw as mystery. He to doorknob, counterpane and incised stone That chanced to notice him appeared Too familiar for comment. And so they got used to one another, The mysteries and the familiar. In time all mysteries became familiars. He in long familiarity Disowned their secrets of their mystery. Ceasing to notice him, they left as though By prearrangement for the nearest country. Someone will be the first to find that country, In reciprocity for its reality Will learn new names of all the mysteries And write such full particulars in letters home Unlike all correspondence known, Since he with counterpane, doorknob and cut stone Will parse that language of their own To blurt out mysteries in ours, where all's familiar.
My mother, who opened my eyes, who brought me into the terrible world, was guilty. Her look apologized: she knew what anyone said was true about us but therefore unfair. How could they blame us for doing the things we were set to do? Never heroic, never a model for us, or for anyone, she cowered and looked from the corner of her eye  &ldquo;Et tu?&rdquo; And it always meant we were with her, alas. No one else could find the center of the world. She found the truth like a victim; it hit her again and again, and she always cried out. At the end she turned to me, helplessly honest still: &ldquo;Oh, Bill, I'm afraid,&rdquo; and the whole of her life went back to her heart, from me in a look for the look she gave.
The buildings in Harlem are brick and stone And the streets are long and wide, But Harlem's much more than these alone, Harlem is what's inside  It's a song with a minor refrain, It's a dream you keep dreaming again. It's a tear you turn into a smile. It's the sunrise you know is coming after a while. It's the shoes that you get half-soled twice. It's the kid you hope will grow up nice. It's the hand that's working all day long. It's a prayer that keeps you going along  That's the Heart of Harlem! It's Joe Louis and Dr. W. E. B.,  A stevedore, a porter, Marian Anderson, and me. It's Father Divine and the music of Earl Hines,  Adam Powell in Congress, our drivers on bus lines. It's Dorothy Maynor and it's Billie Holiday,  The lectures at the Schomburg and the Apollo down the way.  It's Father Shelton Bishop and shouting Mother Horne.  It's the Rennie and the Savoy where new dances are born.  It's Canada Lee's penthouse at Five-Fifty-Five.  It's Small's Paradise and Jimmy's little dive. It's 409 Edgecombe or a cold-water walk-up flat  But it's where I live and it's where my love is at Deep in the Heart of Harlem! It's the pride all Americans know. It's the faith God gave us long ago. It's the strength to make our dreams come true. It's a feeling warm and friendly given to you. It's that girl with the rhythmical walk. It's my boy with the jive in his talk. It's the man with the muscles of steel. It's the right to be free a people never will yield. A dream ... a song ... half-soled shoes ... dancing shoes A tear ... a smile ... the blues ... sometimes the blues Mixed with the memory ... and forgiveness ... of our wrong. But more than that, it's freedom  Guarded for the kids who came along  Folks, that's the Heart of Harlem!
From the blind kingdom From the blind kingdom where his horns are law, Gigantically plunging and charging, he enters the clockface labyrinth  Man-in-beast, creature whose guileless power is his doom. In the heart of the maze In the heart of the maze whose ritual pathways goading lance, bloodflowering dart, veronica and sword define, The fateful one, fate's dazzler, gleams in suit of lights, prepares for sensual death his moment of mocking truth. In the fiery heart of the maze the bullgod moves, transfiguring death and the wish to die. Sol y sombra From all we are yet cannot be deliver, oh redeem us now. Of all we know and do not wish to know, purge oh purge us now. Ol&eacute;! Upon the cross of horns be crucified for us. Die for us that death may call us back to life. Ol&eacute;!
As if without notice, it began: curls of wire emerging from warehouse depths, engendering a darkness that gathered like a storm in the distance. Still, when morning came, and the barrier with it, there was a moment when even the doers were caught unawares. And as if at low tide  and wade across morning and the mounting wire, one's glasses in one's hand. But not for long: the barrier was suddenly a net pulled taut, a breakwater that bodies could not cross, and daylight was halved like a pear, divided for the two sides of the identical street, each knowing its abandoned twin, its other pulse. How had consciousness arrived that day, what dreams of open spaces were harbored in the last moments, before the soul would turn and see it was only staring in the mirror; neither Hadrian, nor the dynasties, had equal resources to build a wall this impenetrable. Cordoned within  man became a D&aelig;dalus heating his wax; or, more pedestrian the circus feat: a leap from a window while the police climbed the stairs. The ancient gods remark: how ingenious to change the nature of distance itself a mile can take a lifetime to traverse. So when flight was lost, or the ordinary movement across open space, time too was captured, held back like a clock in a drawer, possibility suddenly a figure whose voice in the distance resisted understanding. Tongues had been separated, one from the other, to keep the spiraling tower from growing, but here the same tongue, the same voice was parted, one side quartered like a figure in a shuttered room. How ingenious, say the gods, to take that which is the same, and leave part to grow like a bud that is season-touched, while the other is left to form like fruit in a bottle.
<> her adolescent breasts  and eyes   and hips    and legs as well that were once so cool around her schoolboy lover  now move in time to dreams of her body's gangster   waiting naked for her    in a place where it is silent     except for the downpour. Lately she has become aware  of her own movements;   next to her body    she wears very little; She has heard of the freedom that like rain  runs loose about the city    and being no different than her age,   being only her age,   she lies open to new possibilities  and quick, new birds twitter in her blood. But  the gangster   will dullen her,    and he who will disappear eventually     will cloud her innocence  and we will find her only   when all that's precious    is dead in her. Where is  the schoolboy lover,   tell me    where is he? Not down by that river  but minute among his fantasies   with potent secretaries    who rise at dawn from his mind,     damp and warm.     and come out of his eyes while she walks there   alone this evening, while she walks   with the last crazy song about to die in her.
I am inside someone who hates me. I look out from his eyes. Smell what fouled tunes come in to his breath. Love his wretched women. Slits in the metal, for sun. Where my eyes sit turning, at the cool air the glance of light, or hard flesh rubbed against me, a woman, a man, without shadow, or voice, or meaning. This is the enclosure (flesh, where innocence is a weapon. An abstraction. Touch. (Not mine. Or yours, if you are the soul I had and abandoned when I was blind and had my enemies carry me as a dead man (if he is beautiful, or pitied. It can be pain. (As now, as all his flesh hurts me.) It can be that. Or pain. As when she ran from me into that forest. Or pain, the mind silver spiraled whirled against the sun, higher than even old men thought God would be. Or pain. And the other. The <> are withered yellow flowers and were never beautiful.) The yes. You will, lost soul, say &lsquo;beauty.&rsquo; Beauty, practiced, as the tree. The slow river. A white sun in its wet sentences. Or, the cold men in their gale. Ecstasy. Flesh or soul. The yes. (Their robes blown. Their bowls empty. They chant at my heels, not at yours.) Flesh or soul, as corrupt. Where the answer moves too quickly. Where the God is a self, after all.) Cold air blown through narrow blind eyes. Flesh, white hot metal. Glows as the day with its sun. It is a human love, I live inside. A bony skeleton you recognize as words or simple feeling. But it has no feeling. As the metal, is hot, it is not, given to love. It burns the thing inside it. And that thing screams.
<>  The waves plunge many fathom deep, and flow  Unresting o'er the rocky base below, And glimmer shifting in the fitful glare;  So great unrest about thy heart doth go, So deep a flood of turbulent despair. Stand true, O tender heart and strong, stand true:  For I, who steer alone across the deep,  By thee, unknown of thee, my course must keep O'er the foam-crested fields for ever new;  And thou, alone, unknowing, on the steep, Must watch the waves with ruin all bestrew. Not overnear to thee my course may run;  Yet pray I, somewhere on the bitter tide  Thy beam the shuddering night for me divide, And show the heart-red splendour of thy sun  Reorient with delight upon the wide Waters of gloomy death when life is done.
In a between world, a world of amber, The old cat on the sand-warm window-sill Sleeps on the verge of nullity. Spring sunshine has a quality Transcending rooks and the hammering Of those who hang new pictures, Asking if it is worth it To clamour and caw, to add stick to stick for ever. If it is worth while really To colonise any more the already populous Tree of knowledge, to portion and reportion Bits of broken knowledge brittle and dead, Whether it would not be better To hide one's head in the warm sand of sleep And be embalmed without hustle or bother. The rooks bicker heckle bargain always And market carts lumber  Let me in the calm of the all-humouring sun Also indulge my humour And bury myself beyond creaks and cawings In a below world, a bottom world of amber.
O Bitterness never spoken, the death mask etched in silver, the dark limbs rolled in lead where the shallow grave conceals despair: the image of a large head, forward, devouring the collarbone. No general in brass over it and no conquering angel kneels. This was the end: There were no firing squads, no City Hall Nathan Hale with a bronze cord at his throat speaking of lives and his country (where the generations came, rose, wavered, scattered like a great sea coiling against rock-buttressed walls that disappear into a shoreline of weeds and sand.) Only a small room and a million words to be written before mid- night against poverty and idiot death like the gray face of Emerson fading in New England winter twilight; the hard face vanishing in snow, the passionately soft words issuing from the mouth. Listen to the rock, the oracle no longer there! To be the last American, an embryo coiled in a test tube, to be a fixed and paralytic smile cocked upward to the clouds, to see friends and enemies depart (around the corner) their sticks and smart fedoras bright in sunlight, to be or not to be Hamlet, the Prince of Wales, or last week's New Republic; to be death delicately walking between chimney pots on Eighth Street, possibly this is best to be or not to be.
I am looking for love. What I mean is, I am looking for  For LOVE. I do not want to put socks on my feet. I want to put love on my feet. I do not want to put a shirt on my back. I want to put love on my back. The world is full of love. There is love in animals. There is love in trees. Love in fish pools. Love in stones. Love in mountains. There is love everywhere and I am looking for love everywhere, but people keep getting in my way.
Some say that Guy of Warwick, The man that killed the Cow, And brake the mighty Boar alive Beyond the bridge at Slough; Went up against a Loathly Worm That wasted all the Downs, And so the roads they twist and squirm (If I may be allowed the term) From the writhing of the stricken Worm That died in seven towns.  I see no scientific proof  That this idea is sound,  And I should say they wound about  To find the town of Roundabout,  The merry town of Roundabout,  That makes the world go round. Some say that Robin Goodfellow, Whose lantern lights the meads (To steal a phrase Sir Walter Scott In heaven no longer needs), Such dance around the trysting-place The moonstruck lover leads; Which superstition I should scout, There is more faith in honest doubt (As Tennyson has pointed out) Than in those nasty creeds.  But peace and righteousness (St. John)  In Roundabout can kiss,  And since that's all that's found about  The pleasant town of Roundabout,  The roads they simply bound about  To find out where it is. Some say that when Sir Lancelot Went forth to find the Grail, Grey Merlin wrinkled up the roads For hope that he should fail; All roads lead back to Lyonesse And Camelot in the Vale, I cannot yield assent to this Extravagant hypothesis, The plain, shrewd Briton will dismiss Such rumours (  But in the streets of Roundabout  Are no such factions found,  Or theories to expound about,  Or roll upon the ground about,  In the happy town of Roundabout,  That makes the world go round.
Since much at home on My face and gnomon, The sun refuses Daylight to increase; Yet certain powers dare Miscount my hours there Though sun and shadow Still collogue in peace. These rogues aspire To act Hezekiah For whom Isaiah In a day of trial, All for delaying His end by praying Turned back the shadow On my honest dial. Nay, Sirs, though willing To abase the shilling From noble twelvepence To the half of ten, Pray go no further On this path of murther: If hours be Dismalized, Sure, I'm finished then.
The garden slackens under frost, and the trees, scored by the season's extravagant orange and red, begin discarding what they will not need. How many more signals do we want? Brown, gray, the brown skittery refuse in the field is what the natural world is moving toward. In the middle distance, the children run to the creek, run to the dwarf-apple and across the clipped green grass to where their father is stacking wood, all of them wearing primary blue. This yard is what we salvage from the scrub that overtakes the orchard and the pasture. <> and in the blue heavens, nothing visible but her pale oblivious twin.
We are elements of design just now. We can't decide between food or love. This is such thick book I fear it will take years to read. Don't got it. Fresh out. A week? Don't got that neither. A day? A night? Too long. An hour then? A minute? OK, but you must hurry. Close the book. Let's Run. Jump over the fat Turk scarfing up the van. Put your face in mine, roll up your skin in mine, save space as well as time, don't get tangled in the tugboat lines, they're there for other crimes. Cut across fields, streak through alleys, go over the national defenses of several small nations. Like that. And you who hold the soap bubble between your chopsticks over us like an umbrella over two sick mammals see that what quivers under is merely animation to throw into relief what rages above, cheek, eyes, lips, etc. Oh love. Has watching hit a snag, is everybody's watch broke or in decline? Quite fine thank you, having a life. I didn't say intriguing, I said weird. And all.
Dragging its feet the spring across the ragged grass is April like a flash and thick as thoughts the sparrows wing into the sunrise of Amy and Lew in love. Now loosed the streams like incorrigible girls meander where they must not go and like bad boys the gales blow across the world in swirls this wayward morning of Amy and Lew in love. In the original colors lit in Paradise to heat man's soul the flowers of the field are slowl- y burning to nothing bit by bit through the long midday of Amy and Lew in love. With one paw raised and bared his teeth my dog is arrested by the hush of dusk, and in the whispering brush the hare has vanished like a breath. Sudden is the evening of Amy and Lew in love. Night speaks not. From pole to pole the Milky Way flows motionless and every star without distress exists and all together roll, the speechless midnight of Amy and Lew in love.
We must be slow and delicate; return the policeman's stare with some esteem, remember this is not a shadow play of doves and geese but this is now the time to write it down, record the words  I mean we should have left some pride of youth and not forget the destiny of men who say goodbye to the wives and homes they've read about at breakfast in a restaurant: &ldquo;My love.&rdquo; without regret or bitterness obtain the measure of the stride we make, the latest song has chosen a theme of love delivering us from all evil destroy ...? why no ... this too is fanciful ... funny how hard it is to be slow and delicate in this, this thing of framing words to mark this grave I mean nothing short of blood in every street on earth can fitly voice the loss of these.
And what is new in the snow? Footmarks diverging. Golden patches, nacre patches, as on the fleece of butchered lambs. And what is new in the sand? Distant cities, a pillar rising from each. Some kind of Lot's wife, turning back, gently petrifying. And what is new in the mirror? Breasts like a pair of calves, twins of the doe. And King Solomon telling lies. And what is new within? Like the fine hair-thread of a galvanometer, like a river's minute source, someone is thinly laughing. And therefore exists.
Well have I loved ye, little songs of mine, Well have I loved the days that saw ye born. As frail perfections blown upon the wing I bid ye &ldquo;via!&rdquo; And as unconfin&egrave;d be ye As swallows winnowing the wind  before the pale clouds taste the wine of morn  While th' uncrushed stars still cling upon the vine.
One day 3 poets &amp; 60 ears sat under a green-striped Chautauqua tent in Aurora listening to Black spirituals, tapping their feet, appreciating words singing by in mountain winds on a pleasant sunny day of rest the wild wind blew thru blue Heavens filledwithfluffycloudsstretchedfromCentralCitytoRockyFlats, Plutonium sizzled in its secret bed, hot dogs sizzled in the Lions Club lunchwagon microwave mouth, orange- ade bubbled over in waxen cups Traffic moved along Colefax, meditators silent in the Diamond Castle shrine- room at Boulder followed the breath going out of their nostrils, Nobody could remember anything, spirits flew out of mouths &amp; noses, out of the sky, across Colorado plains &amp; the tent flapped happily open spacious &amp; didn't fall down. Cumulus clouds float across blue sky over the white-walled Rockwell Corporation factory  am I going to stop that? RocMountains rising behind us Denver shining in morning light  Led away from the crowd by police and photographers Middleaged Ginsberg &amp; Ellsberg taken down the road to the grayhaired Sheriff's van  But what about Einstein? What about Einstein? Hey, Einstein Come back! Waiting for the Judge, breathing silent Prisoners, witnesses, Police  the stenographer yawns into her palms. I walked outside &amp; the bomb'd dropped lots of plutonium all over the Lower East Side There weren't any buildings left just iron skeletons groceries burned, potholes open to stinking sewer waters There were people starving and crawling across the desert the Martian UFOs with blue Light destroyer rays passed over and dried up all the waters Charred Amazon palmtrees for hundreds of miles on both sides of the river &ldquo;Give us the weapons we need to protect ourselves!&rdquo; the bareheaded guard lifts his flyswatter above the desk  whap! A green-letter'd shield on the pressboard wall! &ldquo;Life is fragile. Handle with care&rdquo;  My Goodness! here's where they make the nuclear bomb-triggers. 2,000,000 killed in Vietnam 13,000,000 refugees in Indochina 1972 200,000,000 years for the Galaxy to revolve on its core 24,000 the Babylonian Great Year 24,000 half life of plutonium 2,000 the most I ever got for a poetry reading 80,000 dolphins killed in the dragnet 4,000,000,000 years earth been born
They offered me a contract when my turn came to be born, A water-tight agreement, all well and truly drawn: The guarantee on parchment with a flourish six-inch long And a great fat gob of sealing-wax as big as any gong   But I didn't read the small print at the bottom. A free land to live in and God's free air to breathe; Free milk, free specs, free dentures before I'd lost my teeth; A free education in grammar school or college, And a free encyclopaedia to the whole of modern knowledge   But I didn't read the small print at the bottom. A Five-Star Mental Clinic with free soap for blowing bubbles And psychologists in every room to listen to my troubles; A gold ring for my finger, for my mouth, a silver spoon, And a ticket for a non-return excursion to the moon   But I didn't read the small print at the bottom. I was analysed and treated with a mild electric shock. They brought me here by rocket and took back a lump of rock; Gave me a litre of oxygen and left me on my own Playing marbles with the polished glassy pebbles of the moon   &lsquo;Cause I hadn't read the small print at the bottom. Oh, they carried out their promises, said what they had to say. For however free your life is, you've always got to pay. You sign along the dotted line and your name's stamped out in  black! You're born into a one-way street and there's no turning back   So always read the small print at the bottom.
&lsquo;Living in America,&rsquo; the intelligent people at Harvard say, &lsquo;is the price you pay for living in New England.&rsquo; Californians think living in America is a reward for managing not to live anywhere else. The rest of the country? Could it be sagging between two poles, tastelessly decorated, dangerously overweight? No. Look closely. Under cover of light and noise both shores are hurrying towards each other. San Francisco is already half way to Omaha. Boston is nervously losing its way in Detroit. Desperately the inhabitants hope to be saved in the middle. Pray to the mountains and deserts to keep them apart.
This Lord, whose image here we see, Lies now bereft of will and thought, Who burned with a youthful wish, maybe, To lance the mumps our moon has caught; Tall, and indifferent, and serene, Unmoved above the fiery scars Of rocking phlox, when dawns are seen To lick the lamp-black off their skies; And when the hot west in sunset fries That gold-scum yields him no delight, Nor all that silver trawl of stars Fresh in the shrimp-nets of the night. Like whitened work-sweat off his pate Bird-droppings trickle into his eyes, While he, sole Lord, sole tenant, lies Low in a mouldy marquisate.
To strike that special tone, Wholly truthful, intimate And utterly unsparing, A man communing with himself, It seems you need to be alone, Outwardly unhearing  As might be now, The streets wiped clean of traffic By the curfew (Apart from odd patrolling Jeeps, which scurry through This decent district), The noise of killing Far away, too distant To be heard, above this silence (A young Malay out strolling  If you insist on instance  Chopped by a Chinese gang of boys; A party of Malays Lopping an old man's Chinese head, Hot in their need to burn his hut; The riot squad, Of some outlandish race, Guns growing from their shoulders), Until tomorrow's news, And subsequent White Papers, Analysing, blaming, praising, Too distant to be heard Above this heavy hush Of pealing birds and crickets wheezing, Tones of insects self-communing, Birds being truthful with themselves, Intimate and unsparing  But birds are always chirping, Insects rattling, always truthful, Having little call to twist, Who never entertained large dreams Or made capacious claims, Black lists or white lists: It hardly even seems The time for self-communing, Better attend to nature's artists.
Skin currency and exchange rates always an unconscious collusion for extermination sharp price hike early 1790s skin prices climbing up and down the Coast Indians now have plenty of iron for tools want display items copper blankets interchangeable media for potlatching Indian &lsquo;money&rsquo;  demanded more and more for skins as killing instruments in hunting as well as war removing the metaphor the sea otters can now be killed by Indians directly not only for but
I watched her coming through the park And wanted that black hair, that shape, That curved voice calling me my name, And as I wanted this I saw Her life could not be touched by mine. I know that she is real somewhere, Her set of rooms and obligations Owned impossibly without Me coming up in dreams or talk, Her earrings, postcards, clothes and love Invisibly acquired and lost With birth-certificates and keys: A life imperial in scale If I alone could enter it To map its rich confusion and desire. You could not count the theories Aroused and then discredited In this place in an afternoon, The shadow pastorals performed Inside the mind as summer throws The switch on brick and grass and skin, And no one minds or needs attend This conference, and no one dares. The earth could not support the weight And raw perfection of despair.
There are some souls who may look in on these Essential peoples of the earth and air  That have the stars and flowers in their care  And read their soul-suggestive secrecies: Heart-intimates and comrades of the trees, Who from them learn, what no known schools declare, God's knowledge; and from winds, that, singing, fare, God's gospel, filled with mighty harmonies. Souls, unto whom the waves impart a word Of fuller faith; the sunset and the dawn Preach sermons more inspired even than The tongues of Pentecost; as, distant heard In forms of change, through Nature upward drawn, God doth address th' immortal part of Man.
<> Dispassionate, final, she swept From her white shoulders the vesture My own hands had laid there; stepped Forth from the love that would hold her Out in the empty dawn, One moment and mist would enfold her Hiding the way she had gone. Yet she wavered, paused in the gateway, Stood there with downbent head, Half turned to look back, and straightway Before I could follow, fled. House and hearthside are heavy with sorrow For one who would be free, Yet oh! she may come back tomorrow, Dance through the rain to me.
Give us back, Oh give us back Our bodies before we die! Trot, trot, trot, corpse-body, to work. Chew, chew, chew, corpse-body, at the meal. Sit, sit, sit, corpse-body, in the car. Stare, stare, stare, corpse-body, at the film. Listen, listen, listen, corpse-body, to the wireless. Talk, talk, talk, corpse-body, newspaper talk. Sleep, sleep, sleep, corpse-body, factory-hand sleep. Die, die, die, corpse-body, doesn't matter! Must we die, must we die bodiless, as we lived? Corpse-anatomies with ready-made sensations! Corpse-anatomies, that can work. Work, work, work, rattle, rattle, rattle, sit, sit, sit, finished, finished, finished  Ah no, Ah no! before we finally die or see ourselves as we are, and go mad, give us back our bodies, for a day, for a single day to stamp the earth and feel the wind, like wakeful men again. Oh, even to know the last wild wincing of despair, aware at last that our manhood is utterly lost, give us back our bodies for one day.
Be as you are; your story is all told, And all without the cost of augury. Nothing in years, nothing in chance or fate, May dent the mail of your complacency. Be as you are, and always as you are; Grope for no more than may be requisite. You are among the chosen of the world Who serve it best when unaware of it. For while you see it as it never was, Your ministration will not be in vain; You will ameliorate the mystery Somewhat in seeing so little to explain. You will not see the drama of dead lives That are behind calm faces and closed doors; You will not feel the weight of heavy chains That others wear that you may not wear yours; You will not hear the breathing of the beast That has been history since there was man; And seeing not much that need be different, You will not wonder why it all began. You will not have to see how small a place Will be enough to make of you a king; You will have all there is for you to use, And having little will have everything.
In line of what my folks say in Montgomery, In line of what they're teaching about love, When I reach out my hand, will  Or cut it off and leave a nub above? If I found it in my heart to love you, And if I thought I really could, If I said, &ldquo;Brother, I forgive you,&rdquo; I wonder, would it do  So long, so  Me  I been swimming with my head deep under water, And you wished I would stay under till I drown. But I didn't! I'm still swimming! Now you're mad Because I won't ride in the back end of your bus. When I answer, &ldquo;Anyhow, I'm gonna love you,&rdquo; Still and yet  Now listen, white folks! In line with Reverend King down in Montgomery  Also because the Bible says I must  I'm gonna love you
all wrapped up in herself everyone was she got it singing emission breath the box of shadows minute to minute through the whole world the beasts return one beast pride has dissolved in who recognizes the shadow gives way they proliferate wrapping life visions knock your block off pulp stars in your head no harm to anybody
My daddy is refusing to eat. He has been in the hospital too long; he has had to watch as one of his many roommates, a quiet black gentleman about his age, passes away in the night; he has to lie alone in a bed and watch his own torso dwindle away, to be patient as his pants and shoes become obsolete. As soon as he eats, he has to go to the bathroom, and the man can no longer walk, cannot rise an adult from his bed; cannot shut the bathroom door behind him, the word  his again. The man my daddy has become cannot deal with more than a thimble of food, and he will not get adjusted to a world of harassed nurses and public bedpans. He will let most of his meals lay fallow on their trays. He will glare at his son's persistence with the anger the sick have for what a healthy body can't know. He will force you to smell the blossoming of his terrible resolve. He would rather die.
We find her on a side street of Sapulpa, living in a little tomb her son built of stones. We walk in, under the catalpa tree, and she cradles our faces in her hands, asking where we've been. &ldquo;I'll cook for you-uns,&rdquo; she says, knowing we came for the old days, knowing we can see reflected in her eyes the clock and the daybed and the fields through the window, with cousins stooping there. In the front bedroom, where she slept with Grampa, the dog with the chipped ear listens. The stove blazes through isinglass. We have found for a moment this woman with her hair in a bun, who stood with Grampa before a giant wooden wheel that went nowhere while we hopped round like chickens.
Thinking back, they either pulled me like a tooth, or drew me like a rabbit from a hat, or else I came to life like something frantic from under the ice on Sunday the twenty-sixth of May nineteen sixty-three. It was thirteen hundred hours, GMT. Whichever way, it's either passed me by at something close to the speed of light, or else I've lived it frame by frame, the whole slow-motion picture show, as if that day were thirty years, nine hours, eleven minutes, five, six, seven spasms of the second hand ago.
with white lifebuoys stuck to its sides and a Dunkirk flag. We're on board an Edwardian gunboat or  or that studio-on-water that Monet built out of a workman's hut. We've got a boat-for-all-seasons look. Up front a man with a microphone helps to unroll &lsquo;the centuries preserved on either bank&rsquo; ... that church where William Blake got spliced; the bench where Turner outstared the sun. (No mention of McCann's old dredger beached like a whale with a petrified spout or Mortlake brewery's golden drains where kids fish the yeasty foam for sprats.) A lonely police-launch beetles past with something wrapped in a black plastic bag. But that's another trip. Right now Putney bridge floats overhead like an ancient biplane gracefully leaving its place in history ... and sailing out towards some broader element.
It is snowing so lightly the air seems blurred with static through which I see white rimming the woods like shadows on the negatives of old pictures. Only the cardinals flame out of the trees with the hard-edged purposes of hunger. This is pure process, the blinding imperative of physics or art, as a billion anonymous crystals each an artisan of light, hurl through the cold air. I want to be buried like this, the snow falling and falling into the earth until every crevice and canyon is filled, as in China when for burial they filled the seven openings of the body with white jade.
Two years high by the world wide, It scatters pebbles on every side, It takes two hands to cake or cup, It pulls the tails of puss and pup. And the blaze of whins, the smell of turf, The squelch of mud, the belch of surf, The slop of porridge, the squawk of gulls, Enter that smallest of small skulls. Which some day, skull and nothing more, Will lie in a box on a foreign shore; Nor will those empty sockets be, Like seashells, mindful of the sea. For mottled fields and marbled foam, Cries of birds and smells of home, Will all have vanished and the skies Have lost their blue like those blue eyes.
Virtue all men stand under, what wonder, blinded on thy  column transcendental, thou art Sterile since not bedded with man thy secular wooer who  could waken thy Dreams to bloom; and why blinded? Darest not take, not take to thy sight these anarchic, thy Realms of thy reign abandoned? Anchorite of the aether, thy influence in the brain quivers  but tenuous ... with what desperate antennae, dearest  and thy Lamps in our breast fret out, no less does thy bruised  forehead anger us like the Great limed birds, Isaiah and Chartres in the Pensioner hold of thy sisters, cold heraldic Mercy and Charity-sour-dugged. Widowed of our seed which would leaven and make serial  thee marmoreal in the hangings of heaven, welcoming Nature's moan as an ever imminent epithalamium, know  that, hooded, thy Dream of will's no will flowering in Action, blowzed menstruate, wasting till some fancied Excellence fit thy arrival. Rigid, breathless to scare not thy death-heeled steps, O  novice, we should wait thee, as pure and dawnlit, thy Guardians, the elder cliffs of the first country to chant and  entemple thee Born beside an unstrung blue Sea and trembling its transparence in thy mien, O equable! O crags and crushed-foam beauty! Beautiful named because from time abstract and therefore  sacrosanct? Ah, what good if the Cunning have bandaged thee thus with eternity, turned  thee lodestar blandishing them and the Innocent in the ignorant ruin of Kingdoms and fevered republics babbling dry-lipped Beneath thy blind silence? Blown, see, against thy portals, centuries of mortals mouth  blasphemy righteous: &ldquo;What reward for Fasting, and why, the future clasped, must the present ring  of diverse winds puff out in Vanity? She will not come down Lest our contentment then should prove her jealous Heaven untrue.&rdquo; Virtue Virtue of all men, fear not that we thy temple crumble, flesh  crumbles but Not till the mind's raped out. Fear rather thy name be  forgotten from father to Son or by thy saints. Come down, let there be Justice though the heavens fall, be virtue of our Temporary measure.
Tufts of brassy henna in the palm's shaggy topknot O Palm, I like it, I like it! And the dingy underlayer, bedraggled skirt, tattered collar around your furrowed neck, or is it your body, that stout column? You stay awake all night every night and tonight will be full moon. It's March, and the ground beneath you crunches under bicycle tires where you littered it with your fruit, those shiny brown things I must take a nutcracker to one some day, are they edible? You let them fall like a kid in the movies dropping a trail of popcorn. Are you asleep up there, your tousled green uncombed, sunning yourself? Your way of paying no attention, feline, and yet strutting your crazy finery fit to kill, I like it, I like it.
She goes more delicate and gentle than any I know; Compassionate, sweet as the lark's song, Sweet as the wind's song: she is one to be loved. But scorning the flesh she will go lonely through life, Straining to that ethereal detachment, the spirit's realm, the mind's garden; Bruised on the right and cut on the left; The body's coarseness dragged stinking behind to blight her forever. Poor virgin, you forge your own knives, And whet them too keen to be carried. The lusts that you loathe, as the soul you adore, were made by the God; And nothing exists needs praise nor condemnation, but shines its own splendor. The way of your choosing lies sterile and cold, the mind's steel harsh in the wincing flesh. You will go hurt, the wound and the bleeding: But the knives, the knives they are yours.
Witch-hazel, dogwood, and the maple here;  And there the oak and hickory; Linn, poplar, and the beech-tree, far and near  As the eased eye can see. Wild-ginger; wahoo, with its flat balloons;  And brakes of briers of a twilight green; And fox-grapes plumed with summer; and strung moons  Of mandrake flowers between. Deep gold-green ferns, and mosses green and gray,   Mats for what naked myth's white feet?  And, cool and calm, a cascade far away  With ever-even beat. Old logs, made sweet with death; rough bits of bark;  And tangled twig and knotted root; And sunshine splashes and great pools of dark;  And many a wild-bird's flute. Here let me sit until the Indian, Dusk,  With copper-colored face, comes down; Sowing the wildwood with star-fire and musk,  And shadows blue and brown. Then side by side with some magician Dream,  I 'll take the owlet-haunted lane,  Half-roofed with vines, led by a firefly gleam,  That brings me home again.
Looked tough, was tall and permanently bronzed (I should guess Berkeley, do not quote me, though) Not an ounce above the statutory weight, Two hundred pounds, most of it bone and muscle; Blue-eyed, with jutting chin and jutting brows. The nose, however, did not command the chin. Myself, I would rather have no chin at all Than one that dared be wiser than its boss. As for his mouth, a man-sized Cupid bow, Curved for kissing a diminutive mother And flashing teen-age smiles of high intent: Was that the cause, or was it one more symptom, Of his twin habits equally repulsive To us inveterate Western Europeans  Downing a midday pint of raw cow's milk And treating France's noblest vintages Like bath-tub gin whenever he got high?
The heart of Thomas Hardy flew out of Stinsford churchyard A little thumping fig, it rocketed over the elm trees. Lighter than air it flew straight to where its Creator Waited in golden nimbus, just as in eighteen sixty, Hardman and son of Brum had depicted Him in the chancel. Slowly out of the grass, slitting the mounds in the centre Riving apart the roots, rose the new covered corpses Tess and Jude and His Worship, various unmarried mothers, Woodmen, cutters of turf, adulterers, church restorers, Turning aside the stones thump on the upturned churchyard. Soaring over the elm trees slower than Thomas Hardy, Weighted down with a Conscience, now for the first time fleshly Taking form as a growth hung from the feet like a sponge-bag. There, in the heart of the nimbus, twittered the heart of Hardy There, on the edge of the nimbus, slowly revolved the corpses Radiating around the twittering heart of Hardy, Slowly started to turn in the light of their own Creator Died away in the night as frost will blacken a dahlia.
Clouds outwit the light meter as the shutter lifts Salt, like ground ice, scaffolds stray blades of grass; the water table rises and brings to air an aspro bottle, its mud-encased body shattered. Not made larger though brought closer the paddocks to the east no longer rise but slide into the immediate ground: a theory evolves it's all based on triangles and collusion, the patterning of landform and occupation linked to longer walks and evenings spent on the  verandah.   The graveyard (are there rules here concerning area?) lies amongst sheep-death carnage, at a point of concentrated takings: earlier a fog tamped down the rough edges, welded dust and clouds into a smooth if rippled seam.
Through the night It snows on the Sierras as it does On the grave of Apollinaire in the Cemetery of P&egrave;re Lachaise and on The radio I get Truck music from San Jose: &ldquo;Want to make it to Amarillo by Morning ...&rdquo; &ldquo;... just Because you ask me to.&rdquo; The green oak Burns weakly In the grate And as I write In the window Of the loft The light Turns blue
<> And noticed how it walked in them, And some, unconscious that Grinning Jack Abided his time inside their flesh Stared back, and wondered what I saw. The way they dressed, a boil on a face, Their vanities were small and obvious  Women wore their coldest masks and men Looked elsewhere and thought perhaps I was some friend they'd dropped. But I did not know them well enough to say It's Grinning Jack I see today, Not your beauty or your ugliness, Nor how fresh you seem, nor how obvious The chemical decay, But the skeleton that every man Ignores as calmly as he can, Who'll kiss us on the cheek and blow The floss of temporal things away. It's Grinning Jack I see today, And once seen he'll never go away.
We look down into a garden of spines as the evening gathers in the shadows of the new wall. The blank stone terrace has no rail, and I feel I could walk in air. &ldquo;Rosemary, cactus, sweet basil ...&rdquo; It is night, and he is naming the gems of his captive garden like Ophelia or like the God he no longer allows. Inside, behind glass, the little heater glows with electric warmth. We sit and resume the lesson, but it won't go. The wind is catching in the eaves, and the garden bangs in his ears, and beyond the garden the lost wars and the lost poets, and the names of the defeats blessed by saints at the Ebro, the Llobregat, the Guadalquivir. His brows are like twin, stiff arches above his eyes, but he is not surprised  nothing in himself is surprised  and the jaw's latent movement is without fear, and the shadows along the jaw are without fear. He is starting to die, to die of care and of the need to be read even as I read him, a rhythm only, stumbling and American.
Last night I watched for Death   So sick of life was I!  When, in the street beneath,  I heard his watchman cry  The hour, while passing by. I called. And in the night  I heard him stop below, His owlish lanthorn's light  Blurring the windy snow   How long the time and slow! I said, &ldquo;Why dost thou cower  There at my door and knock? Come in! It is the hour!  Cease fumbling at the lock!  Naught's well! 'T is no o'clock!&rdquo; Black through the door with him  Swept in the Winter's breath; His cloak was great and grim   But he who smiled beneath  Had the face of Love not Death.
It has no entrance. For years I walked past the building But could never find how to get in. As I go past the windows I can see clerks piling up Stacks of money, but there is No way to get at it, the money I need so badly. I enquire about the memory bank, But none of my friends has ever Heard of it. They think I'm crazy Or hallucinating. They tap A finger to their heads when I ask about the memory bank. They say there is no such bank, But I know better. I have some Wonderful memories from your Memory bank and I want more.
I have seen the pageantry of the leaves falling  Their sere, brown frames descending brokenly, Like old men lying down to rest. I have heard the whisperings of the winds calling  The young winds playing with the old men  Playing with them, as the sun flows west. And I have seen the pomp of this earth naked  The brown fields standing cold and resolute, Like strong men waiting for the end. Then have come the sudden gusts of winds awaked: The broken pageantry, the leaves upflailed, the trees Tremor-stricken, the giant branches rent. And a shiver runs over the remnants of the brown grass  And there is cessation.... The processional recurs. I have seen the pageantry. I have seen the haggard leaves falling. One by one falling.
The orphan is looking for parents She roams the world over Looking for parents and cover. She looks at this pair and that Cries, Father, Mother, Likes these, does not like those, Stays for a time; goes. Crying, Oh hearts of stone. But really she is better alone. Orphan, the people who will not be your  parents are not evil, Not the devil. But still she cries, Father, Mother Must I be alone for ever? Yes you must. Oh wicked orphan, oh rebellion, Must an orphan not be alone is that your opinion? At last the orphan is reformed. Now quite Alone she goes; now she is right. Now when she cries, Father, Mother, it is only to please. Now the people do not mind, now they  say she is a mild tease.
There was this head had this mouth he kept shooting off.  Unfortunately. It could have been worse for us than it was for him.  Provisionally. But since nothing in this world is certain and you don't know  who hears what We thought it was time he bit off more than he could chew.  Literally. By the time he is found there'll be nothing much left to tell  who he was. But of course some clever dick from the &lsquo;Forscenic Lab&rsquo;  reconstructs Him, what he used to be not from his actual teeth, not his  fingerprints, But from the core the toothmarks of the first and last bite  he'd taken of This sour apple. But then we would have told them anyway.  Publicity.
Quietly he watched the weighed eyes close And the unhallowed presence intrude. When the boy fell on the rug, he rose In silence, his anger dispossessed By kindness that took as its disguise Ironic leave of each kingly mood; Then stared at the scheme of paradise In woven silk, and the limbs at rest. The masterful whirls seemed metal grills Of a great window, at which he stood For a breeze from the spare-featured hills To sting his eyes like a hint of dust. But its life was fixed like summer air Till he assented with gratitude To the grace that broke the pattern there In sleep's unthinking perilous trust. Taking your challenge, one from their line Is drawn, as flies by the smell of blood, To feed his quickness on your design; And hovers, thin-bearded, empty-faced. Gentle warrior, accoutred knight, Whose field is mired by a stream in flood, You mock his coming; as if to fight, That too, were an exercise of taste. What reason is there? Each perfect shape Rebuts its devil and is pursued, Turns at a promise, half-wills the rape; Then feels the unclaimed impulse burst Its random confines, until that drive Is the one proof that is understood, With no thought but panic left alive, No art except to believe the worst.
On the farm this had been the hour Persimmon leaves rang like iron Or the sound of the screendoor slamming Flung itself for two long miles up the hill Beyond turnstiles, past the laggard cows To the ear's target where the boy wandered, Tapping his fresh stick along the path. Or perhaps the old man's shout caught him In a beaver brook, where long grasses combed The mud. Deer too indulged the sliding belly, Endured chill blessings of the sly and beaver priests Who raised the waters high over an eager back. The boy looks up from the long rows of corn, Startled. He sees the old man as if a horn blew. Oh why does he fear his grandfather Grey in the startling sun, beyond silken curls? Only that that man might bother To stoop and tell him how years flee, Delicate and skittish as his pale pony.
If you should go there on such a day  The red sun disappearing, Netted behind black sycamores; If you should go there on such a day  The sky drawn thin with frost, Its cloud-rims bright and bitter  If you should go there on such a day, Maybe the old goose will chase you away. If you should go there to see The shallow concrete lake, Scummed over, fouled with paper; If you should go there to see The grass plots, featureless, Muddy, and bruised, and balding  If you should go there to see, Maybe the old goose will scare you as he scared me, Waddling fast on his diseased feet, His orange bill thrust out, His eyes indignant; Waddling fast on his diseased feet, His once ornamental feathers Baggy, and smeared with winter  Waddling fast on his diseased feet, The old goose will one day reach death; and be unfit to eat. And when the goose is dead, then we Can say we're able, at last, No longer hindered from going; And when the goose is dead, then we Have the chance, if we still want it, To wander the park at leisure;  Oh, when excuse is dead, then we Must visit there, most diligently.
When your best friends are taken away; when your mentor's daughter (forbidden, you live with her in secret) dies of a tumour; when you're constantly hiding and the love of friends protects you from starvation or bullets, and you return by secret corridors to Byzantium not Rome, then you'll know at times of suspicion that all is suspicious and everyone's done time, and it's only the wind that blows between words not through them that constitutes poetry, so you practise your craft lightly, assiduously, and when that world vanishes you too take care to vanish with the beauty and intimacy of a secret friend, tumour or lover, sensibly, quietly, silently taking cover. Candles in the window on All Souls' Day, October wind gathering at the glass and rain softening dead leaves. The tanks are rumbling again, lorries are taking a whole town away. We've been here before, whatever the season or year. Your hesitant voice in mid-sentence, stopped in my ear.
After I get mother's gown back on, she starts to undo tie, then knot, then tie, frantic to get the gown off, and in the process kicks off her sheet and blanket. Now her legs are high in the air, and I'm not looking, I'm covering again, boosting her up on the bed again, fixing her sheet before she kicks it off again, above my birthplace reluctantly hovering, eyes averted. I've seen it too much, the gray-haired V of labia closed around browned minora, poor cheeks scutched up like a Jersey cow's, tail up, holes exposed. If only my eyes were like a sculpture's, smooth, unseeing. Is she without purpose? Organic brain syndrome, her new diagnosis, says yes, she really is. But I can't feel sure she's not insisting she's my baby, my cupcake, every fifteen minutes until, exhausted, I realize I can leave. It's a hospital, after all. I head to the mall. Poppyseed cake and tea. How shyly some friends have told me of the glimpses they've had of their parents during this or that necessary act. But she is always before my eyes, her endurance, for me, enduring. Oh stop, stop and die. Let the body's boundary be inviolable. Let me lie in bed unafraid to look down, finding yes, my sex is still my own! I do not look like her! Let my husband not look at me and think, as Horace thought of his old love's vagina, that it looked like a cow's asshole, wizened and fecal. God how I hate my body, and you, Horace, over two millennia. But not the way I hate my mother, my throttled love. Too late, too late, I'm trespassed now.
The universal sign for what is unknown is a kind of shrug, lowered brow; a shaking of the wrist so that fingers clash. Nodding the head may or may not signify approval. Ticks, fleas, the usual intimates of arboreal life die the same death beneath any nails. The thick-skinned orange gives a roundness to the air not available in mountains, but common to the shape of endearment. Hugging, scratching, grooming is allowed in fullness behind bushy silence. A tree stripped to bone is whiteness. Who doesn't require the sound of water? A brimming cup tilts always. Now one must agree on &ldquo;pour.&rdquo; This is the meaning of rain. Sky descends. Rivers will not stay. The region for thighs is known by the sign for &ldquo;itch,&rdquo; but different from what is considered by certain thinkers as intrinsic. Which of us would be evolving? The baring of the teeth brings forth an orange, or hanging upside-down. In the sunlight, notice how he disavows the gesture for &ldquo;serve.&rdquo; And how someone must either clean or abandon the latrine.
a sleepless week will not impede twenty hours after my last nap a formal structure from knowing itself here (call it a garden out of sheer ballsiness the trees topiary the rocks confounded grots and every stream an amnionic sluice from which a vista's born form form form (the house itself wanders in the garden and there are certain precious leaves that medicine my life by name! their names! (and stone shaped like hell-mouths shaped like fear and off below the pines a man dressed for travel digs with his bright spade he digs until beneath the topsoil he tenderly uncovers a woman sleeping naked who rouses and steps out of earth her eyes still closed (it is She come to us again the loam sifting from her breasts she moves across the ordered path and passes into the unordered underbrush she is the only definite (she proves something, that the soul will never die that every object is transparency (we killed her and the myth forgive us we killed her and she returns her side-wound clotted with flowers spring again and things suddenly exist.
Since I stroll in the woods more often than on this frequented path, it's usually trees I observe; but among fellow humans what I like best is to see an old woman fishing alone at the end of a jetty, hours on end, plainly content. The Russians mushroom-hunting after a rain trail after themselves a world of red sarafans, nightingales, samovars, stoves to sleep on (though without doubt those are not what they can remember). Vietnamese families fishing or simply sitting as close as they can to the water, make me recall that lake in Hanoi in the amber light, our first, jet-lagged evening, peace in the war we had come to witness. This woman engaged in her pleasure evokes an entire culture, tenacious field-flower growing itself among rows of cotton in red-earth country, under the feet of mules and masters. I see her a barefoot child by a muddy river learning her skill with the pole. What battles has she survived, what labors? She's gathered up all the time in the world  nothing else and waits for scanty trophies, complete in herself as a heron.
Man and Woman, face to face. Same height. Woman facing audience. In the uncertain pause, she is again assured of her reality. More blows, same effects. Tears blind her, she dashes them away. More blows, face distorted. Still same effects. She feels it a weakness swallows. Another weakness. Stares dully at the figure before her. Impotence realised weeps. Weeps loudly and slobberingly and hopelessly like a whipped child. Such lack of control is intolerable. Members of the audience want to strike each other.   A few women weep too, in identical pitch.   It becomes a panic spreading suddenly.   The men leave quickly, swallowing hard.   One man throws a brickbat at the inert back, then   Others do the same.   When he sinks stoned, expiring a yell of exultation    rises from the men long sighs of relief from the    women.   &lsquo;ANTICHRIST&rsquo;
<> And look at the rank weeds and the strange grass The torn blue curtains and the broken glass, I seem to be afraid of the old place; And something stiffens up and down my face, For all the world as if I saw the ghost Of old Ham Amory, the murdered host, With his dead eyes turned on me all aglaze. The Tavern has a story, but no man Can tell us what it is. We only know That once long after midnight, years ago, A stranger galloped up from Tilbury Town, Who brushed, and scared, and all but overran That skirt-crazed reprobate, John Evereldown.
Going down but hardly far enough, I drag myself with shoestring effort to a small summit, dropping everything except my body still breathing fire. I close my eyes and let my dream sustain me for a while. This is no inferno after all which it may well have been, but just another landscape justified by being there. Do I belong, I wonder, to the common plain? A bitter thought. I know that I would rather suffer somewhere else than be at home among the accepted styles. I cannot bear the view, although it seems important somehow either to endure it as a fact of self-created history, or to work upon its nearest particulars in the light of love. To work upon that's the point, but can I do it? Wisdom is of little use to tired men. Metaphor and symbol fake original attack when orders no sooner given were carried out. Perhaps there is another way and I will find it: concentrate, concentrate, make the mind a fist. Why should I be reconciled to middle-aged spread and rigmarole? If nothing else, I'll keep my nerve, refuse the company of priests, professors, commentators, moralists, be my own guest in my own one-man lunatic asylum, questioning the Furies, my patron saints, about their old and new obscurities.
Oh be a demon outside all class! If you're a woman or even an ass still be a demon beyond the mass. Somewhere inside you lives your own little fiend, and woe betide you if he feels demeaned, better do him justice, keep his path well cleaned. When you've been being too human, too long, and your demon starts lashing out going it strong, don't get too frightened it's you who've been wrong. You're not altogether such a human bird, you're as mixed as the weather, not just a good turd, so shut up pie-jaw blether, let your demon be heard. Don't look for a saviour, you've had some, you know! Drop your sloppy behaviour and start in to show your demon rump twinkling with a hie! hop below! If, poor little bleeder, you still feel you must follow some wonderful leader now the old ones ring hollow, then follow your demon and hark to his
The presence of good is its answer (at the curb the dead white verb, horse breathing white steam in the air) Leaving, into the clocks sad lovely lady fixed by words her man her rest her fingers her wooden house set against the rocks of our nation's enterprise. That we disappear to dance, and dance when we do, badly. And wield sentiment like flesh like the dumb man's voice like the cold environment of need. Or despair, a trumpet with poison mouthpiece, blind player, at the garden of least discernment; I stagger, and remember / my own terrible blankness and lies. The boat's prow angled at the sun Stiff foam and an invisible cargo of captains. I buy injury, and decide the nature of silence. Lines of speed decay in my voice.
The ceiling shows the yellow stains Where snow blew into the attic, A paper-thin pale moss upon the beams Wetting my hands as I swing My weight in through the trap-door. That frontier crossed, I take to trespassing. The attic room a pelt of dark, the house's Dreamless skull. I pause and listen, Crouched sprinter-like over the boards. And slowly there identify The architecture of the drifts, Their frozen combs of snow a yard high. The torchbeam's dirty stripe of light Lies brutal as a scar; no snow falls, For these pillars have erupted Like fungi, the midden in the middle Of the floor a sheet draped on a chair. In the room below my daughter fights With sleep, her breath a handsaw's icy rasp; Above, the aerial's hollow stem Scraping its bracket. Panic has a metal taste. Everywhere the mercury-coloured pools Of settling snow lap against the joists, And here beneath a broken slate A drift of lilies grows taller by pale atoms. I cannot touch this profligate: The snow is furtive and obscene, And when the wind rises the attic fills With particles of light, a television Screen that sucks me in. The blizzard Is in the house, its voice like pigeons, Such soft insistence on its mastery. And I find I have always lived elsewhere, That I have never known this place: Old clothes and broken furniture, a bath Of bulbs with tendrils black as candlewicks, Sparkless but for snow. I breathe and hear A breath returned, the flutter as My daughter's voice thaws and freezes, Freezes, thaws, and streetlight falls Out of the roof like flekes of orange rust. The drifts are grey and tiered like hives, The swarming snowpoints hover and subside. Ice on my clothes is fine as insect-wings.
He lived in a suburb he worked in a branch Of a suburb a suburb a branch of a branch. Partitions of grass and hedgerows of glass Interposed on his days an insular glaze So the fonts that hurled at his morning eye Howling the hugeness of history Gnashed and mumbled in other tongues. On a day when he went to the center City His arclit shadow stretched empty streets Watched by windows, menaced in whispers Stuttered from flags on rhetorical winds. In the morning the Bulletin told of decisive Intrigues, of mobs that massed at the crossings, Uprisings downthrowing regimes in the flexion Of power the type spelled his hometown. Barricades sprouted like bulbs in his absence.
this(let's remember)day died again and again;whose golden,crimson dooms conceive an oceaning abyss of orange dream larger than sky times earth:a flame beyond soul immemorially forevering am  and as collapsing that grey mind by wave doom disappeared,out of perhaps(who knows?) eternity floated a blossoming (while anyone might slowly count to soon) rose did you see her?darling,did you(kiss me)quickly count to never?you were wrong  then all the way from perfect nowhere came (as easily as we forget something) livingest the imaginable moon
Rolling in at twilight Newport Oregon  cool of september ocean air, I saw Phil Whalen with a load of groceries walking through a dirt lot full of logging trucks, cats and skidders looking at the ground. I yelld as the bus wheeld by but he kept looking down. ten minutes later with my books and pack knockt at his door &ldquo;Thought you might be on that bus&rdquo; he said, and showed me all the food.
 I bring the wrinkled workman, risen from the dead, To park gates, he wearing cap and muffler, winter Overcoat; dumb there he stands, staring, at peace; Out of the tomb came lacerated belly, bandaged pipe And pipe-cough, and long and gluttonous  Engulphing stare.  Crows burn, bright as pheasants, in the shrubs; Over high levels of the park's grey rocks Hang sunlit beards of straight-lipped waterfalls, Tall and whitewashed, they fall and are blessed; A gaggle of grey geese, huddled close in the long Glitter of his gaze, crank their rusty gear of rafts, Loud and discordant, across the boat-pond. His Bethany burns in silent joy, is brilliant With benediction, fragrant, ablaze and unconsumed  Death was not yet for him, not yet. A ball Is slogged; exultant breeze leans In regattas of flying children; under dark Trees pools of burning sunlight smoulder  Green on blinding grass.  Death was not yet, grave linens, face-cloth, Death's stink not yet to be; beside him at the warm Black bars I watch and share tranquillity, A visionary peace possesses him, a brooding joy, His chrism of tears and quietness, between grey gate-stones  And the iron bars.
They must be different from us, Those top persons Whose indecisions and decisions numb us As the time worsens; Missile-to-missile construction booms, The economy hearkens; Thumpings are felt in many wombs Though the milk darkens  But &lsquo;Passive suffering is not a theme For poetry,&rsquo; cried Yeats Who, touched by the Sidhe when young, could dream That he creates Exultant destiny once more as though Homer had not Used up all heroism long ago. Still, what's to stop Imagination, even now Unreason's spawn, and power's, abuse our age? If woe blast Paradise, or threat of woe, Then, great with rage, Turn, Imagination, and conceive On days like dragons' teeth. What can be brought to birth but we bequeath The primal gift Of where we've been and have to go? Then in that deed Play out, as ever we'd the will to do, The natal thread  Retell, in the leaping of exultant breath, In the blood that sighs, What knowledge in the bone this side of death Death makes us prize.
Light bangs empty barracks where a corporal waits for orders from the sea. The highest tide since Caesar swept all wood away. New huts are planned in China and the urge to enmity dries in wind that rips a banner into rag, the wrong word from my mouth. Raw day and cormorants are blazing over sand. This debris is pure. The next girl will come burning from the foam, my name her checkpoint and my tongue her navigational fix. It's official now: the Army will return. This beach will roar with cannon. Cormorants will dive where sun began reflecting and the bones of lovers shift with no help from the moon. Kiss me wind and city white. The gate is never golden and the green teeth of a jumper rattle off the rock each violent wave. My orders are: find wood but don't invoke the tide. I trust the hum, the next wave starting from a continent of girls. I trust I'll die but never Christmas day. They'll say, he's gone. And someone: good for him. The raw blaze of the void might bring me wood tomorrow, a hundred girls on whales all crying help. I smile at China and memories of docks. A dock here would be fatal. No rock wall protecting piles from thrust and glare. And what boat would stop here, sea whipped ladies on the deck throwing me their eyes?
They have taken Sun from Woman And consoled her with Moon; They have taken Moon from Woman And consoled her with Seas; They have taken Seas from Woman And consoled her with Stars; They have taken Stars from Woman And consoled her with Trees; They have taken Trees from Woman And consoled her with Tilth; They have taken Tilth from Woman And consoled her with Hearth; They have taken Hearth from Woman And consoled her with Praise  Goddess, the robbers' den that men inherit They soon must quit, going their ways, Restoring you your Sun, your Moon, your Seas, Your Stars, your Trees, your Tilth, your Hearth  But sparing you the indignity of Praise.
the dazzle, the seduction the design intoxicated and quivering, bees? is it flowers? why does this seed move around. the one divides itself, divides, and divides again. &ldquo;we all know where that leads&rdquo; blinding storms of gold pollen.  grope through that? the dazzle and the blue clay. &ldquo;all that moves, loves to sing&rdquo; the roots are at work. unseen.
I look and look. Looking's a way of being: one becomes, sometimes, a pair of eyes walking. Walking wherever looking takes one. The eyes dig and burrow into the world. They touch fanfare, howl, madrigal, clamor. World and the past of it, not only visible present, solid and shadow that looks at one looking. And language? Rhythms of echo and interruption? That's a way of breathing, breathing to sustain looking, walking and looking, through the world, in it.
When Orpheus walked beneath the trees all the leaves were Eurydices when Orpheus looked into a well he saw the skies of hell when Orpheus took up his lyre he saw his funeral pyre on which the Maenads tossed his scattered limbs and hissed &ldquo;Everything he did was wrong: love and theory, wife and song&rdquo; yet when they picked up his head they kissed his mouth and said &ldquo;All the lies these lips told kept us from ever growing old  now keep them wet eternally.&rdquo; And Orpheus saw them throw it in the sea.
Having inherited a vigorous mind From my old fathers, I must nourish dreams And leave a woman and a man behind As vigorous of mind, and yet it seems Life scarce can cast a fragrance on the wind, Scarce spread a glory to the morning beams, But the torn petals strew the garden plot; And there's but common greenness after that. And what if my descendants lose the flower Through natural declension of the soul, Through too much business with the passing hour, Through too much play, or marriage with a fool? May this laborious stair and this stark tower Become a roofless ruin that the owl May build in the cracked masonry and cry Her desolation to the desolate sky. The Primum Mobile that fashioned us Has made the very owls in circles move; And I, that count myself most prosperous, Seeing that love and friendship are enough, For an old neighbour's friendship chose the house And decked and altered it for a girl's love, And know whatever flourish and decline These stones remain their monument and mine.
<> All that is flesh or dream of the flesh will come. All of the roads of the world at the last turn hither When the singing feet are weary, and the lips are numb. We are young now; we are gay. It does not matter. We too shall come. Glorious women with white, rebellious faces Tossed like foam on the heave of the sullen sea, Crying in vain revolt at the slow, relentless Beat of the whelming winds of eternity That pound their pitiful beauty into oblivion  I have seen them go. I know what the end must be. Dominant men, the iron of heart, the defiant, Building a fame to challenge the heedless sky, Rearing a tower of triumph, a dream in granite To mock at time and fling decay the lie ... The cold waves crumble and sap and gulf them under. Slowly, aye but surely as we, they die. Pale-browed priests, wide-eyed with a valiant vision, Mouthing of God and a life that defies the tomb, Stand rapt-faced on the edge of the flying waters, Dream of a dawn and a peace outlasting doom. The gray cold breakers swallow their prayer into silence, And the dream in their eyes is drowned in the leprous spume. Beauty and fame and faith they are one forever, One with the fretted foam and the wind and the spray; All of their loves and deeds and dreams forgotten In the gray crush of the fog, and the water's gray; All of their glory mute in the crying silence ... We shall be mute tomorrow, even as they. Oh, there is time for us yet good time for singing, And wine, and games, and the white delirium Of the kiss in the night. But ever across our laughter An echo falls like a sword, and we are dumb. The voice of the water speaks. Our hearts make answer: We come!
The stonework soared, but inch by bloodstained inch. His shout churned in a vacuum of arches and rafters. A pain welled in his shoulder and ran the length of the bones in his arm; he flexed his fist to let it find a level; it sank to a low ache, tugging his thumb in a spasm that matched his heartbeat. He felt as if he'd been tranced. His voice and the sharp flow in his arm seemed an awakening. Deep in the swimming particles of dusk the dying figure throbbed on the cross. Who could survive that ardour? Not popes, not kings, not Cuthbert on his rock flayed by the northern winds, pinned there by troth, perceiving an awesome response in the ocean rising and running bleak green on the stone ... A wind lifted the spray: a distant whisper no louder than bridehood closing its petals to seal a canker; then all fear, all morbid love, all words to celebrate, all paint to thumb the eye all music's power to stun, rose in his mind, gathered, and was lost: a knowledge he'd never owned nor sought. A light came on in the porch, so he walked to the door, his heeltaps ringing like asdic in the flags. A glow from the rich glass patched the dark facade. In every cleft angels clung, or swarmed on the wall like bats. Some sulphurous was watching as he left.
My true friend's poems about aging and death held my mind as in a sea-surge this afternoon, for they are true poems, and good ones, and I myself feel weakened much of the time now from the nights of death-laden insomnia, which no weakness cures. Almost equinox. A cold March day in Saratoga with hesitating rain in the pines. Beyond the woods, rushing cars and trucks on the interstate make a continual sound of rising and falling, a seething almost like the sea, which is almost like the sound of my friend's poems. But he is five or six years younger than I, what does he know? And what does anyone know? Here, here is where it is, here in my own skull. Well, soon enough he will learn. And so will everyone. I went out walking in the woods with my hands in my pockets, thinking and brooding, because like the sea trees are important, and rain is important, and the important wet brown needles were springy beneath my feet that nevertheless went falteringly, cautious for the litter of wet downed limbs, the boneyard of the pines. I found a half-buried old wax-paper Dixie cup almost like a fungus, stained softly gray in a flocky pattern edged with coral and orange. Sometimes one doesn't care any longer about oneself, but for a true, five-or-six-year-younger friend one would dash into the sea, if that would help, one would beseech the gods.
These small West Country towns where year by year Newly elected mayors oppose reforms Their last year's Worships promised down the roads Large detached houses, Croydons of the West, Blister in summer heat; striped awnings hang Over front doors, and those geraniums, Retired tradesmen love to cultivate, Blaze in the gravel. From more furtive streets Unmarried mothers leave for London. Girls Who had such promise suddenly lose their looks. Small businesses go bankrupt. Corners once Familiar for a shuttered toll gate house Are smoothed away to make amenities. The copper beech, the bunchy sycamore And churchyard limes are felled. Among their stumps The almond tree shall flourish. Corn Exchange  On with the Poultry Show! and Cemet'ry, With your twin chapels, safely gather in Church and dissent from small West Country towns Where year by year, Newly elected Mayors oppose reforms.
wundiwundiwundiwundiwundiwundi wundiwundiwundiwundiwundiwun wundiwundiwundiwundiwundiwu wundiwundiwundiwundiwundiwu wundiwundiwundiwundiwundi wundiwundwundiwundiwun wundiwundiwundiwundiwun wundiwundiwundiwundiw wundiwundiwundiwundiw wundiwundiwundiwundiwu wundiwundiwundiwundiwund wundiwundiwundiwundiwundi wundiwundiwundiwundiwun wundiwundiwundiwundiw wundiwundiwundiwuindwuind wuindwuindwuidnwuindwuindw wuindwuindwuindwuindwuindwui wuiwuinwuiwuiwuinwuiwuiwjinw wuiwuinwdnudwuiwuinduwuindwu wuindwuindwuiwuindwuindwuin wuinwuinwuindwuindwuind wuiwuinwuidwuinwuindwuk wundiwuindwuindwuindwuindw wundiwundiwundiwundiwundiwu wuindwuindwuindwuindwuind wundiwundiwundiwuindwuindwui wuiwuindwui   ndwuinduindwuin wuinwuinw  wuinwuinwwuinwu wuindwuin  wuindwuind     wuinwui wundiwundiwu     ndiwundiwundiwu wundiwundiwundiwundiwundiwundi
Once the ice was in a tray. You would hold it under a faucet till the cubes came unstuck, in a block. Then you had to run more water over it until, finally, the cubes came loose. Later on, there was a handle you lifted, breaking out the ice cubes. But still it was a nuisance  in order to get at one ice cube you had to melt the whole tray. Then they invented the ice cube maker which makes cubes individually, letting them fall in a container until it is full, when it stops. You can just reach in and take ice cubes. When her husband came home he saw that she was drunk. He changed into an old shirt and slacks. He stared at the screen door in the kitchen... the screen had to be replaced. He wondered what he was doing. Why fix it?
being to timelessness as it's to time, love did no more begin than love will end; where nothing is to breathe to stroll to swim love is the air the ocean and the land (do lovers suffer?all divinities proudly descending put on deathful flesh: are lovers glad?only their smallest joy's a universe emerging from a wish) love is the voice under all silences, the hope which has no opposite in fear; the strength so strong mere force is feebleness: the truth more first than sun more last than star  do lovers love?why then to heaven with hell. Whatever sages say and fools,all's well
Big barbershop man turning away, sides of his face lathered and shaved close with the cut-throat he always uses, big barbershop man turning away, helping the neighbours make good, sweating inside a stretched t-shirt with NO MEANS YES on the back of it, waltzing a side of pig, taking the weight, scalp like a glove rucked with the strain, big barbershop man turning away trim inside like a slice of ham big barbershop man hoisting the forequarter, fat marbled with meat stiff as a wardrobe, big barbershop man waltzing a side of pig striped like a piece of sun awning, cool as a jelly roll, big barbershop man waltzing the meat like a barber's pole on yellow Main Street.
Who is it accuses us of safety, as if the family were soldiers instead of hostages, as if the garden were not mined with explosive peonies, as if the most common death were not by household accident? We have chosen the dangerous life. Consider the pale necks of the children under their colored head scarves, the skin around the husbands' eyes, flayed by guilt and promises. You who risk no more than your own skins I tell you household gods are jealous gods. They will cover your windowsills with the dust of sunsets; they will poison your secret wells with longing.
Gogol (his namesake) felt inordinate distances, lonely ones, whenever he and his love were in the company of almost anyone, even their families. If ghosts were possible birds would walk only at twilight, at the god hour which descends like a plausible sun traveling in the wrong direction. And it isn't necessarily lonely when the sun goes down and the darkness comes upon that white house near the large cold stone with snow coming down in the countryside and only one light on. It's not a very complete light. Wouldn't it make a lot more sense if Gogol and his love just let everybody be? The train whistles. 3 units of signals, red signals, shine briefly in the night.
Some days he lurched around the ring, yelling in Irish. You circled him, he was the sun, his name was Mick. With his long whip, he cracked the indolence at your heels, he made your spine sing its straightest song. He was a drunk and cast a smelly shadow while you sat soaping bridles in the tack room where stirrups took the sun. Your mother came at six, shafts of light still hitting the roof of the Impala. You stood on two hay bales and stared as they paced in their stalls wearing bright blankets stained with liniment. A horse's breath formed a little white cloud like a man's. They had the same yellow teeth, the same lathery sweat. You never knew when they would turn. At Christmas your father gave him a bottle, the paddock froze and the water in the bathtub outside the barn. After his car wreck, he sat in a plastic chair and watched the lessons. With his wet smile. His gimpy leg. He snapped a crop, he cursed the air, and then the city closed the stable. He put the reins of a horse in your hands. His laughter followed you and made you cry. Crybaby! He was your first teacher.
O! Mister Preval said I'll hire a hall And 'vite all the niggers to a grand ball. Danse, O Calinda, boudoum, boudoum. The hall turned out to be an old stable An' supper laid on a long plank table. Supper was laid Danse, O Calinda, boudoum, boudoum. The mules in their stalls stood up and snorted To see the way those darkies cavorted. The way those crazy darkies cavorted Danse, O Calinda, boudoum, boudoum. There wasn't no light but the light o' the moon Every darky came in paid a picayune. Danse, O Calinda, boudoum, boudoum. For music Preval had an ol' banjo bum banjo screeched An' a fiddle that creaked like a dyin' crow. Danse, O Calinda, boudoum, boudoum. His coat all grease an' his shirt all starch, Hisone-eyedcoachmanledofftheGrand March. His ol' black blind Danse, O Calinda, boudoum, boudoum. Old Nancy Latiche got the mostest laughs When she lifted her skirt to show her false calves. Danse, O Calinda, boudoum, boudoum.
Those houses are too square, those roads too straight, And the trees, though old, look planted to conceal Some sheltered institution hospital Or army base. We find the visitors' gate: A car-park conifered as a cemetery, Well-ordered, clean. You'd know it miles away. Now, like all guilty secrets, it unmasks Its human face: a shabby hall set out With coffee, tea, as for a village fete; Familiar transactions, social tasks In a world removed from all we could transact; And people round us trying to connect The outside past &lsquo;Do you remember?&rsquo; to this, The present, inside. Lives have raced ahead On different tracks, with so much left unsaid, And now unsayable, that we dismiss The normal words: gossip, solemnity Seem to affront the occasion equally. &lsquo;It won't be long.&rsquo; The parting sounds inane. &lsquo;We'd better let you out,&rsquo; the warders smile: The trees, of course, were planted to console. They fail. The landscape opens once again  A low green wood, shut pubs, a water tower  And freedom, if that is what this is, tastes sour.
<> My mother as she bent in her garden. <> Too much, the collards and tomatoes, A man, however lousy, taking care of the bills. This was the reason for the early deaths My mother was to find from that point on, Turned dirt and the mock of roots, Until finally, she gave her garden up. <> Is the motto of our neighborhood, These modest houses That won't give an inch.
 buttercream there was buttercream smeared in generous mounds on top of each little sunburnt cake  buttercream the colour of that buttercream was stuck somewhere between pink and green.  but I don't think they can have been Earth Cakes I never saw that particular colour on this planet, I would remember.  the cakes themselves were the colour of the beach at Woolacombe in August and they were contained in soft corrugated semi-transparent crumbsticky paper cups,  Some were more savoury than others, featuring, besides the compulsory pink-green cream something like Heinz's Sandwich Spread the appetiser which defied der Kaiser.  It was considered impolite to consume an entire cake. The etiquette: to take a bite, about one-third, or maybe half, then put the bitten cake back on the communal plate and take a bite from another one, either bitten or unbitten.  I kept eating those cakes happily until I woke with a light stomach ache.
Listen here, sistren and brethren, I am goddamn tired of hearing you tell me how them poor folk, especially black, have always got a Cadillac parked in the front yard, along with the flux of faded plastic and tin. I just blew fourteen thou, which make no mistake is the bankroll, on a Toyota Celica. &ldquo;The poor man's sports car,&rdquo; the salesman said, which is the truth. (I'll write about the wrongs done to car salesmen another time.) She do look mighty good there in my front yard, too, all shiny red and sleek as a seal. It means a lot to me, like something near or almost near what I've always wanted, and it reminds me of the Emperor Tlu whose twenty-first wife asked him what he wanted for his birthday, and he being a modest man said the simplest thing he could think of off-hand, a jade chrysanthemum, and thirty years later he got it, because you see that's how long it took the master jade-carver and his apprentices to make it, and when he got it Tlu, that is he keeled over on the instant in sheer possessive bliss. Why not? Professor Dilthey once said history is the science of inexactly recording human inexact passions, thereby giving birth to sociologists, as every schoolperson knows. Well, let them have a look at all these four-wheeled jade chrysanthemums around here.
Cat bird singing makes music like sounds coming at night. The trees, goddamn them, are huge eyes. They watch, certainly, what else should they do? My love is a person of rare refinement, and when she speaks, there is another air, melody what Campion spoke of with his follow thy fair sunne unhappie shadow ... Catbird, catbird. O lady hear me. I have no other voice left.
This gray board fence turns blue in the evening light And the sycamores reign down upon it their diadems, And blue and green batter in wood and stems The stems of light Their green and golden gems. At once, out of a million years of energy, All turn to flesh board, gate, and branch  With that quick sunset wrench Which seems like chance, Not in the fashioning of entropy. If then the flesh is yours, as now it is, I have lost yard, sunset, and all Into a mild greeting, and I call The sunset to your thought, to tell it is Parent apparent to your rich apparel.
 Come, workers for the Lord  And lift up heart and hand; Praise God, all skill at bench and board,  Praise, all that brain has planned.  When Christ to manhood came  A craftsman was he made And served his glad apprentice time  Bound to the joiner's trade.  When Christ on Calvary  Drank down his cruel draught, The men who nailed him to the tree  Were men of his own craft.  So, God, our labour take,  From spite and greed set free; May nothing that we do or make  Bring ill to man or thee.  All workers for the Lord,  Come sing with voice and heart; In strength of hands be God adored  And praised in power of art.
When the world was born I saw God in the wind, with wings, move into earth and sleep. In that life I stared at mirages, the roofs of shacks, above them white water and sky, Mama always saying, &ldquo;That's all he does.&rdquo; In each cell of my body is a morning: my sister bleeds as she sleeps, the old man comes home, arms speckled with grease, the scent of opening elm buds hangs in the air, and 27 silver stacks push smoke under a sky of rain clouds.
but he&rdquo; i staring into winter twi light(whisper)&ldquo;was my friend&rdquo; reme mbering &ldquo;&amp; friendship is a miracle&rdquo; his always not imaginably morethanmostgenerous spirit. Feeling only (jesus)every(god) where (chr ist) what absolute nothing
For once it is not our fault and the landlady knows it. In the stairwell her husband's nude body hangs by one foot from the skylight. Is he? Should we? Spit drops from his mouth, not blood. He is only passed out for the day. The wooden slats of the skylight twist and creak, the weight of the noose, his purple foot. Sun and clouds through the window. Our faces blush and pale under his dangerous nudity. Our arms are the useless net he will fall through. How long will he last? The paint snaps off the skylight in big flakes. The glass will shatter and blind us. Should we call the police? Will the fire department come? Brush his hair with your broom. Give us the room to climb. Can we cut? Are you sure? We might as well, while we're at it, ask about the heat, and why the pipes clang at night.
This morning with a blue flame burning this thing wings its way in. Wind shakes the edges of its yellow being. Gasping for breath. Living for the instant. Climbing up the black border of the window. Why do you want out. I sit in pain A red robe amid debris. You bend and climb, extending antennae. I know the butterfly is my soul grown weak from battle. A Giant fan on the back of a beetle. A caterpillar chrysalis that seeks a new home apart from this room. And will disappear from sight at the pulling of invisible strings. Yet so tenuous, so fine this thing is, I am sitting on the hard bed, we could vanish from sight like the puff off an invisible cigarette. Furred chest, ragged silk under wings beating against the glass no one will open. The blue diamonds on your back are too beautiful to do away with. I watch you all morning long. With my hand over my mouth.
<> <> If any thing, then this thing. If what I mean falls on the left I leave it or am left there :with no strength. It means:it doesnt count. I count the blood falling through my arteries seeking the borders of my ancient kingdom finding the limit &amp; past that the place is You. Or it is no place. The blood falls I lift my left hand &amp; let it fall on the small of your back. My hand calls you soft there, calls the skin meek. My hand falls. What it feels I understand as brightness. It counts (says Simeon bar Yochai, the master of lights,) every touch counts when you do it. But a blood is of a slaughtered thing a sacrifice, a use-it-up poured from a thing to a thing. The hand interrupts the fall. To hold the blood &amp; aim it, sprinkle the altar with this rain had been inside a living thing now just a thing. The thing burns. The blood falls through my hands.
Then at the very end when the time was almost remorselessly too late and the season was turning she who had been my friend crossed over. In one night and one morning we were lovers forever and some say beyond all reason. You said you were &ldquo;never turned on by a man's body&rdquo; meaning its appearance meaning love is what brings you down with your lips to my cock in the afternoon love being your desire and your arousal as loving is your proposal and the lust comes two seconds later whereupon I wondered could I match you in such forbearance and by what standard should I judge myself this rough old godlet foundered and gone weird and heady from the sight of a young body here and open like this and causal to his quick uprising and his desire to kiss in the press of time with only small endurance all of your nakedness o my sexy lady. Blue eyes and auburn hair are my delight when October skies are this azure and this clear, when the red and gold in the mapletrees mix colors but stay separate, and when the concords are clustering underneath the vine-leaves, purple, half hidden and half peeping out along the path by the sunny stone seat, ripening late in the ripening of my 67th year, and you are with me, my delight in blue eyes and auburn hair.
He hated roads. He loved the land. He tended to forget Or else he didn't understand That roads were how we met. He loved long walks. He hated cars. He often put them down. Without them, though, I'd have reached Mars Before I reached his town. Now that I've seen bad air pervade An atmosphere once sweet I wish the car was never made That drove me to his street. Now that I've felt a world explode As I had not before I wish they'd never built the road That led me to his door.
Freedom is not following a river. Freedom is following a river, though, if you want to. It is deciding now by what happens now. It is knowing that luck makes a difference. No leader is free; no follower is free  the rest of us can often be free. Most of the world are living by creeds too odd, chancy, and habit-forming to be worth arguing about by reason. If you are oppressed, wake up about four in the morning: most places, you can usually be free some of the time if you wake up before other people.
Exquisite loneliness Bound of mine own caprice I fly on the wings of an unknown chord That ye hear not, Can not discern My music is weird and untamed Barbarous, wild, extreme, I fly on the note that ye hear not On the chord that ye can not dream. And lo, your out-worn harmonies are behind me As ashes and mouldy bread, I die in the tears of the morning I kiss the wail of the dead. My joy is the wind of heaven, My drink is the gall of night, My love is the light of meteors; The autumn leaves in flight. I pendant sit in the vale of fate I twine the Maenad strands And lo, the three Eumenides Take justice at my hands. For I fly in the gale of an unknown chord. The blood of light is God's delight And I am the life blood's ward. O Loneliness, O Loneliness, Thou boon of the fires blown From heaven to hell and back again Thou cup of the God-man's own! For I am a weird untamed That eat of no man's meat My house is the rain ye wail against My drink is the wine of sleet. My music is your disharmony Intangible, most mad, For the clang of a thousand cymbals Where the sphinx smiles o'er the sand, And viol strings that out-sing kings Are the least of my command. Exquisite, alone, untrammeled I kiss the nameless sign And the laws of my inmost being Chant to the nameless shrine. I flee on the wing of a note ye know not, My music disowns your law, Ye can not tread the road I wed And lo! I refuse your bidding. I will not bow to the expectation that ye have. Lo! I am gone as a red flame into the mist, My chord is unresolved by your counter-harmonies.
On golden seas of drink, so the Greek poet said, Rich and poor are alike. Looking around in war We watch the many who have returned to the dead Ordering time-and-again the same-as-before: Those Haves who cannot bear making a choice, Those Have-nots who are bored with having nothing to choose. Call for their drinks in the same tone of voice, Find a factitious popular front in booze. Another drink: Bacchylides was right And self-deception golden Serve him quick, The siphon stutters in the archaic night, The flesh is willing and the soul is sick. Another drink: Adam is back in the Garden. Another drink: the snake is back on the tree. Let your brain go soft, your arteries will harden; If God's a peeping tom he'll see what he shall see. Another drink: Cain has slain his brother. Another drink: Cain, they say, is cursed. Another and another and another  The beautiful ideologies have burst. A bottle swings on a string. The matt-grey iron ship, Which ought to have been the Future, sidles by And with due auspices descends the slip Into an ocean where no auspices apply. Take away your slogans; give us something to swallow, Give us beer or brandy or schnapps or gin; This is the only road for the self-betrayed to follow  The last way out that leads not out but in.
So far, all day, the road to Lake Darling is empty. A flicker with a broken wing steps down to cross. Now the driver comes and sees. He stops, lifts the bird up in his hand, which tightens on its one question. Driving this way, the man is directed to a woman who can fix this, and he goes to her. That evening, he tells his wife how the flicker felt waiting in his hand, the little orange on its head, feathers all of-a-piece. In the next week, from inside, oh, she sees her first flicker on the wobbling suet ball and she tells him first thing, thinking, there, something is done now, something has been passed through, thinking her desire caused it, or the flicker did, or him.
<> Will, like a shunted horse, Nowhere before been, but get The meticulous present of strangeness. Place is of all things vaguest, Terrifying to haul, No load so heavy before mention, Or a smile its vine-thin history. Place, place ornamental deceiver. Be the location constant its Circuit of moles or hills  An illusion, finer than eyes, is. Invites you to come not in. One rather remembers How, in the child's dust, He took up a fine handful And heard, through the thews and wheels, The voice of the horse auctioneer.
<> She wore yellow petticoats trimmed in featherstitching; Some said she was daft and some she was a loon, And some said her grandpaw should give her a switching. She wasn't feared a bit of turning moonstruck, She wore a purple feather stuck up in her hat, She wore a four-leaf clover on her heel for luck, And if she heard a church bell she stopped and spat. She wasn't caring what the pious ones said, She wasn't caring for her old grandfather; She said: &ldquo;I'll lay for a long time dead. It's easy to be good, but why should I bother?&rdquo; She even whistled while she laced her shoes, One of grape-purple and one of grass-green; She boasted to her grandpaw, &ldquo;I'll bring you news Of quare goings-on no one else has seen!&rdquo; She chewed bayberries to make her mouth bright, She didn't care a whit her glove wanting darning; Pert as you please, she went out each night, She wasn't feared of their silly old yarning. Some crossed themselves at her when she went by, Some said she was a loon, some she was daft; She flipped her petticoats and winked her eye, &ldquo;
Late summer. Let's see if they're ripe. Let's hide in torn thickets where the big ones shine high up in the light black suns to be plucked from the sky. Let's dine among bees and blue flies, buckets bubbling red earth's blood slopping over the sides. Let's suck those plump clusters free of their shape, hands scratched, tongues purple again, limbs wrapped in long thorns that tug at our clothes, holding us close to the ground among bones, bottles, sweet smelling mould, and a damp grass no one mows. Let's go home with seeds in our teeth and a dark taste in our throats.
Last night before my window came A wraithie bathed in living flame, &ldquo;I am a herald of the night, I am a lonely, lonely wight. &ldquo;Beside the sea a maiden dwells, Her voice the sound of lighthouse bells, Her eyes the green of starlit sea, Her soul a dwelling place for thee. &ldquo;Good dreamer, I have touched her heart, With burning song I touched her heart And now her dreams are all of thee  This maiden by the deathless sea.&rdquo; Oh, lead me hence, good elf of night, Oh, lead to her signal light; For I am weary of my dreams, Long weary of my feverish dreams.
Playing too happily on the slippery mountainside my only son fell down and died. I taught him to talk honestly and without stalling come across but I could not teach him the cowardice and hesitation necessary to live a longer life unhappily. You see, girl, you ought not to center your affections so, little short of idolatry. A young man is untrustworthy. In the morning satisfied he gets up from your bed and in the evening he is dead.
<> From among them they will choose a messenger. It will fly to the court of the Emperor And bowing with much decorum Will complain bitterly. And the Emperor, who had long ago banished all cages, Who until that moment had been astonished By the birds' flight and by their singing, Will throw open the windows and listening Will detect in the mule's song Some flaw of which he is particularly fond, And he will say to the bird, &lsquo;O stupid thing! Let the mule sing, For there has come about a need of change, There is a hunger now, a need For different things.&rsquo; This is the mule's favourite dream. It's his own invention. Deep in his brain's warren it blossoms.
I am the nor'west air nosing among the pines I am the water-race and the rust on railway lines I am the mileage recorded on the yellow signs. I am dust, I am distance, I am lupins back of the beach I am the sums the sole-charge teachers teach I am cows called to milking and the magpie's screech. I am nine o'clock in the morning when the office is clean I am the slap of the belting and the smell of the machine I am the place in the park where the lovers were seen. I am recurrent music the children hear I am level noises in the remembering ear I am the sawmill and the passionate second gear. I, Time, am all these, yet these exist Among my mountainous fabrics like a mist, So do they the measurable world resist. I, Time, call down, condense, confer On the willing memory the shapes these were: I, more than your conscious carrier, Am island, am sea, am father, farm, and friend, Though I am here all things my coming attend; I am, you have heard it, the Beginning and the End.
Woman fears for man, he goes out alone to his labors. No mirror nests in his pocket. His face opens and shuts with his hopes. His sex hangs unhidden or rises before him blind and questing. She thinks herself lucky. But sad. When she goes out she looks in the glass, she remembers herself. Stones, coal, the hiss of water upon the kindled branches her being is a cave, there are bones at the hearth.
Walking on grass my friend ahead, I behind with the child. She couldn't keep up and wouldn't. The light drained everything of colour, the cattle and pale daisies. I didn't know his mind then. By evening, families strung out across the fields for cars and homes or we too
Solitude closes down around us As we lie passive and exhausted Solitude clamps us softly in its warm hand. A turtle slips into the water With a faint noise like a breaking bubble; There is no other sound, only the dim Momentous conversation of windless Poplar and sycamore leaves and rarely, A single, questioning frog voice. I turn my eyes from your entranced face And watch the oncoming sunset Powder the immense, unblemished zenith With almost imperceptible sparkles of gold. Your eyes open, your head turns. Your lips nibble at my shoulder. I feel a languid shudder run over your body. Suddenly you laugh, like a pure Exulting flute, spring to your feet And plunge into the water. A white bird breaks from the rushes And flies away, and the boat rocks Drunkenly in the billows Of your nude jubilation.
At Schmidt's in Charlotte Street the old waiter scuttled between tables, wrinkled as Adenauer. The menu was opulent, the covers clean. We ate wiener schnitzel with potatoes and sauer- kraut chased by cr&egrave;me caramel, our table talk joky-familiar or sour. We were creatures of mood, and Sunday a family occasion, like bridge or Monopoly, was a debt owed to childhood, keeping track of lost time. And lost time is what the restaurant suggested with figures in shadows and rooms beyond rooms. I can still taste the food in that arrested development, the breadcrumbs rough on my lips, and I find myself rattling on, as if I were an old waiter, finding the whole thing funny and boring and sad. That is the beauty of it: the poetry comes later, shuffling up to you like a Low Church sacrament, a grey-suited man with non-alcoholic wine, glass concentrated in a bead of dark red, serving for sign.
Surely you've trodden straight  To the very door! Surely you took your fate Faultlessly! Now it's too late  To say more.  It is evident you were right,  That man has a course to go, A voyage to sail beyond the charted seas. You have passed from out of sight  And my questions blow Back from the straight horizon that ends all one sees.  Now like a vessel in port  You unlade your riches into death; And glad are the eager dead to receive you there.  Let the dead sort Your cargo out, breath from breath Let them disencumber your bounty, let them all share.  I imagine dead hands are brighter,  Their fingers in sunset shine With jewels of passion once broken through you as a   prism Breaks light into gems; and dead breasts whiter  For your wrath; and yes, I opine They anoint their brows with your pain, as a perfect   chrism.  On your body, the beaten anvil,  Was hammered out That moon-like sword the ascendant dead unsheathe Against us; sword that no man will  Put to rout; Sword that severs the question from us who breathe. Surely you've trodden straight  To the very door! You have surely achieved your fate; And the perfect dead are elate  To have won once more. Now to the dead you are giving  Your last allegiance. But what of us who are living, And fearful yet of believing  In your pitiless legions?
Mouth looking directly at you eyes in their inwardness looking directly at you half lighthalf darkness woman, strong, German, young artist flows into wide sensual mouth meditating looking right at you eyes shadowed with brave hand looking deep at you flows into wounded brave mouth grieving and hooded eyes alive, German, in her first War flows into strength of the worn face a skein of lines broods, flows into mothers among the war graves bent over death facing the father stubborn upon the field flows into the marks of her knowing  <> repeated in the eyes flows into &ldquo;Seedcorn must not be ground&rdquo; and the grooved cheek lips drawn fine the down-drawn grief face of our age flows into <> between her knees life as her son in death pouring from the sky of one more war flows into face almost obliterated hand over the mouth forever hand over one eye now the other great eye closed
The days the motors burn past the houses,under the trees repair smokeyour shingles all grade 5 on the beach tripin a bunch teachers whistle steady heat slow map calendars if you see it might be easy how anyone works in the haze
chimera calls the nightjar sung double-faced in sun and shadow, come together in old style on elder ground expects Lilith to follow   as it would itself solicitous angels guard their quarry well, not even chimera, hidden at will, can nudge its way through the bars and into her jail chimera, watcher of the fluid Graces take heart in what you gather  the coldest whisper, the strainings at Vespers, delight outbrooding  a nightjar's flight
Of all the poses, of all the roles, This is the one I keep: you pass On the canal, your pope's robes Aflame in a secret light, the four Oars of your gondola white As moth wings in the broken dark, The quail-eyed fisher-boys Sliding the craft like a coffin out to sea; The air grows hard; the boat's wake Settles behind you like a wasted breath. (For months, Corvo, you floated through my sleep As I tried to track you down: That winter you lived in a doorway; The days and nights on these back canals You spent in a musty blanket, Your boat both bed and refuge  And writing always The book, the indescribable letters ... Was it the vengeance only That kept you alive, the ripe corkscrew Twisted and deep in the bottle's throat? One afternoon in the late spring I went To San Michele, to see The sealed drawer that holds your name, To take you flowers, as one Is moved to do for the dead, and found Not even a vase to put them in. Leaving, I spread them on the lagoon, Ungraftable shoots of blood. There is, you said, A collusion of things in this world ...) And so you escape. What books there are, Old hustler, will never exhume you, Nor places you stayed. Hadrian, Nicholas Crabbe, you hide Where the dust hides now, Your con with its last trick turned, Stone nightmare come round again  Fadeout: your boat, Baron, edges Toward the horizon, a sky where toads, Their eyes new fire, Alone at the landings blink and blink.
The greatest griefs shall find themselves  inside the smallest cage. It's only then that we can hope to tame  their rage, The monsters we must live with. For  it will not do To hiss humanity because one human threw Us out of heart and home. Or part At odds with life because one baby failed  to live. Indeed, as little as its subject, is  the wreath we give  The big words fail to fit. Like giant boxes Round small bodies. Taking up improper room, Where so much withering is, and so much bloom.
Never call a babysitter in a thunderstorm you do not know How the baby strong as God started all the thunder In order to get attention It is therefore useless to call on the phone Never call a babysitter in the summer rain When the baby has torn a hole in the ceiling And the house is full of water all the lights are fused You won't hear much on that phone Tell her in vain to put the baby in the icebox To keep him cool and dry He will tear the icebox to pieces And destroy the telephone It is therefore useless to express your love When the implacable baby strong as a tank Plows through the walls of the house and blocks the highway Yelling for shelter you can forget that phone Never call a babysitter when the revolution Is in full swing Baby has hoisted the black flag and taken over The telephone company and everything When baby is holding off the police With molotov cocktails bazookas and hand grenades You can forget about calling the babysitter He has stuck a bottle of milk in her mouth You'll never hear what she is saying In short my boy be careful of love It fills the world with this destruction Millions of small pocket cyclones Have fouled up communication with loves Inexhaustible demanding rage Rather than call her on the telephone Which would only be an act of war Go sell your car your golf clubs your tennis racket and your TV Try to raise a little money And pay the baby to set her free.
Buskers down under are commonplace. Many belt it out even at breakfast when maybe it's still dark back home  many who have no talent at all, yet are down on their luck, must perform.   They are strumming electric guitars and giving us songs of cowboys, sheep   are free entertainment though it's cruel to glimpse those lost in glum meditation, who merely hum loud. We float past them and their upturned hats holding a few coins  every one a decoy, bait that's caught nothing. We know just how we'd do it, and know well we are just one up-turned hat away from this status, and sleeping on grass. This morning a cellist holds forth with Bach propped on a stand in front of Aboriginal murals on tile lizards and crocs,   no heed, no more than if Muzak were piped in, waves of it over commuters and shufflers. It must be a mile to that light in the distance. But beyond the fading  into tears because a man with only a dime-store kazoo such as I myself might be able to play offers the lilting refrain of  <> all those thousands of miles catching up at once as if the wild sea breaking broke that fragile reef, me.
The year draws down. In the meadows And high pastures, the green grass veins The grey. Already the stubble Fields are green. Orion stands Another year over California, Simple and lucent, guarding the full moon. Dew descends from heaven Good pours from the clouds. The earth wavers on its whirling track. We milk by lantern light. The shadows Of the cattle are illimitable. The lantern light knots in gouts of gold. As the sun retreats, and the moon Turns its face away and back again, Following the spinning earth Like our following lanterns Through the dark, back to the white breath Of the cattle, back to the smell Of hay and dung and milk, Back to the placental Dark in the abandoned ruins, God goes again to birth.
Another barrel of insect casings spills down the corrugated slants. This city, he thinks, is frayed convenience. Its couch is branded on forehead memorial deposits locked inside television towers. Another decade's ooze rides to the top. Her lips are on a stiff diet. He will have to split his signals elsewhere. Another transmitter extends her voice toward the bonfire outlets, its catalog of endangered critters. A lard haze shudders inside the crevices. He sits in a refugee car molting from hum to snarl. Synthetic apartment appetites. Horoscopes and hands to hold down the celebrated intakes of calibrated mist. Sleek tuxedo sunglasses wrap nylons in a mountain of spoiled tar.
In the forest it is cold. How can it be Colder in the cities? It's as though we were Practicing the art of filigree. There's something eccentric, cranky, obtuse About it, like a castaway's note in a Bottle. Dialectical unfolding of Slinky-toy history, life coils itself Slowly, and then uncoils, descending the stairs Negative reaction by negative Reaction. We thought we were only here to please, Yet as in that old painting of the peasants' feast The banqueter represents the destroyer. Eating is not only feeding oneself, It is digging one's teeth into something.
It's not a present. Call it a reward. The pool is yours. I'll charge you for the water. A shallow end, perhaps, you could afford.   They give you rice or chips with every meal. Look, two cremations for the price of one! A car drives past without a single wheel.   My ornaments were sad to see me go. I must remind them that we still vote Labour. Return the plum tomato that you owe.   But to go to Rome and not speak a word of Latin!
This time of year a twelvemonth past,  When Fred and I would meet, We needs must jangle, till at last  We fought and I was beat. So then the summer fields about,  Till rainy days began, Rose Harland on her Sundays out  Walked with the better man. The better man she walks with still,  Though now 'tis not with Fred: A lad that lives and has his will  Is worth a dozen dead. Fred keeps the house all kinds of weather,  And clay's the house he keeps; When Rose and I walk out together  Stock-still lies Fred and sleeps.
The low-burning moon of moons heats Grizzly Peak the way Berkeley used to build a fire under San Francisco. One monkey  this time it's the monkey moon again, firm &amp; complete; the key to every lonely person's grief. Relief is seeing the motion of the yea-saying eye freeze across skies who've known suns, as many as 50 suns to 5 moons. And there the mystery collapses. Kisses take over; the simian complex, sainthood, Hearst Castle. Always the news is the same: Grizzly Peak Bears All Its Beauty Unalone, surrounded &amp; peopled by sightseers day &amp; night.
<>  Measured and ardent, and the mighty trend  Outward upon a light-pervaded end,  Gained through the fields of flame and hideous blur. Thou art sonorous as the shuddering fir  Thwarting the tempest, nor thy metres bend  Under their splendid freight, when thou dost blend  Power and light and love to speak of Her. Inward thy flame arose and strong with strife  Shone in thy words thou art to me as life,  Beaten, renewed with hope, and undestroyed. Thy voice comes pure to me as waters falling,  Swells till it seems I hear the Seraph calling  Through open spaces of the dayless void.
The hucksters haggle in the mart The cars and carts go by; Senates and schools go droning on; For dead things cannot die. A storm stooped on the place of tombs With bolts to blast and rive; But these be names of many men The lightning found alive. If usurers rule and rights decay And visions view once more Great Carthage like a golden shell Gape hollow on the shore, Still to the last of crumbling time Upon this stone be read How many men of England died To prove they were not dead.
The devil is a rider In slouch hat and boots, Gun by his side, Bull whip in his hand, The devil is a rider; The rider is a devil Riding his buck stallion Over the land. The poor-white and nigger sinners Are low-down in the valley, The rider is a devil And there's hell to pay; The devil is a rider, God may be the owner, But he's rich and forgetful, And far away.
It's a long way from the queer remote silence-making quawk of that heron your words snagged on the wing as I was being born, Jeffers, decades ago, in a Minnesota blizzard, and you were in a squall of rage near Big Sur in the place no longer your place  as you forsaw, dragging stone after stone to your tower nonetheless from the live surf and froth of your own sweat. Edged in now by homes No-Man built to live in high priced suckertraps for those successful in that coming world you shunned and decried poem after bitter poem your stone tower, Jeffers, even your stone tower raised by hand toward the high blue home of those beloved hawks toward whom you turned and turned your falcon of a face for evidence of worthiness, is gone into their hands, their pockets, enhanced by your famous hatred, the prices rising with your skydriven fistlike poems exactly abhorring them. Where I am, in Wyoming still magnificent with wilderness no sea has breathed on for millions of years, the old forces finding a new grip soon will ream out ranchers and farmers bewildered by profits sudden as true strokes, making way for holes into which men hungry for the good life will descend, innocent of your hawks, gulls, godlike stallions, and women with wild eyes, kind eyes, will tend them as some die, most prosper in the ways men do these days, surrounded by the crown jewels of the age  appliances and gadgets designed to make life careless. And they work, dear Jeffers. They do work.
Some folks am mighty fon' o' mockin' bu'ds, Some fools will walk a mile to heah a la'k, Some call de robin's chu'pin' mighty sweet An' listen to it 'twell de day tu'ns da'k, But Ah am thoo wid all b'ud foolishness An' only caihs fu' dem w'en dey is food Kase w'en de moon am high Ah heahs a song Dat to mah po' ol' eahs soun' mighty gude Nowaih in all de dwellin' place ob man, Up Simpson's Crick o' down to Green's Bayou, Kin such a na'chul song be hu'd at all F'um tho'ats ob Ca'line Jones o' Mandy Lou; Its sung by green eyed fellah, yallah striped, A hoppin' in de stream f'om lawg to lawg, An' dat is why Ah pray to Gawd Hisse'f An' thank Him dat He made de ol' bullfrawg.
The angry nettle and the mild Grew together under the blue-plum trees. I could not tell as a child Which was my friend of these. Always the angry nettle in the skirt of his sister Caught my wrist that reached over the ground, Where alike I gathered, for the one was sweet and the other wore a frosty dust  The broken plum and the sound. The plum-trees are barren now and the black knot is upon them, That stood so white in the spring. I would give, to recall the sweetness and the frost of the lost blue plums, Anything, anything. I thrust my arm among the grey ambiguous nettles, and wait. But they do not sting.
Distinction flowers on the darkened lawn;  Sash windows open, the soft tassels shine Where velvet rooms wait till the blinds are drawn  On scents and silences. The heads incline By their own gravitas; the tones exact  Allegiance to a Church of England norm Which has no need of this brief ritual act,  This pause, outlasting all their hands perform. Nobody smiles. They feel the sunlight there,  Leaning across our shoulders; time unfurls And we look back at these who look elsewhere.  Their clericals absorb the light; two girls Bleach out the summer from their swelling dress.  A strength to set about the work of God, This quiverfull of sons; quickened to bless  Their strong maternal staff, paternal rod. A neat, pale face, bare to the clearest bone,  His eyes mere patches of uplifted shade, The gifted one, the friend. And here alone  All sight-lines meet, before the swerve and fade. Our shadows will not press the grass apart,  Or stir the cord on which their love is strung: His finger still invites us to the heart,  His throat uncut, the bastard son unhung.
Now cry your heart out if you can, Cry for many a simple man. I would weep, too, for my part, But too soon I drained my heart, Seeing only beauty could Rouse or touch my tender blood, Seeing that my coward will Kept me far from beauty still And my awkward limbs and tongue Were not framed to charm the young; Seeing all that beauty had Time and circumstance forbade Me to touch or me to taste, Seeing all my youth ran waste. Many a fool as dull as I Now must rouse himself to die, Now must seek a colder bed Than the loneliest he had Now must learn to lie alone In the nakedness of bone, Or through nights of terror wake When harder things than hearts can break; When the inventive eye and head Yield to duller lumps of lead, When snaffling hand, and lying tongue, And labyrinth gut, and bellows lung, About the inhuman landscape spread A natural history of the dead.
He was no good as a lecturer, Droned through his notes. As an appearance he counted, though  Great beak of a Dante nose, Coarse black Pre-Raphaelite beehive of hair, Matthew Arnold side-whiskers, And lumbering body mounted often In ginger-checkered tweed plus-fours On a district-nurse type bicycle. It demanded a vast umbrella, black. (His Rilke Must have influenced Auden's sonnets. His was the first fame I ever brushed against  And nicest possibly.) He held his Wednesday evenings With a gramophone whose loudspeaker Was broad and craggy as himself. He would play whatever people asked for (Somebody naive would ask for The overture to  Or else the apr&egrave;s-midi of a faun  And then some prig would bring in Bach.) It was there I first heard <> <> He took care to provide libretti for everybody, But for some reason didn't care for  An early Glyndebourne attender  I can only just imagine that clumsy body Crammed into a dress-suit. I asked him once With undergraduate pertness What had Coleridge achieved. He replied by reciting &lsquo;Ode to Dejection&rsquo; In a basso voice that trembled. He died by Walking off an Alp. Once his pipe was burning his tongue. He made himself a hookah (narguil&eacute;, hubble-bubble) From the two ends of it And a chemistry flask and rubber tubing. Three things I still copy  His courteous use of &lsquo;Surely'  &lsquo;Well&rsquo;, to start an opinion asked for  And maniac cackle of laughter, crescendo.
Light is bleached by dust and insects torture space, creak like rusty springs in the grass where the sprinkler swings a rope of water on the lawn and last greens echo drowning under yellow, and mud is sharpened by the sun. The arches of the mole are cracked by drought. Drugged by cold insects gather to the warmth of boulders, pokeweed dripping berries. The lake aims a totem of reflections at the red maple. Squeezed like beads of oil from the hard ground ants march south. Dirt piled by ditches is still warm, heavy tents settling as the sun draws through pines dripping strings of honey. Flocks of yellow fly from the poplar.
All day the wind has made love to the lake and tonight the water takes up its bruises and moves away to a safer distance. I am listening for the small sounds of another departure. Summer is leaving as if she could afford the trip. She stands by the road in her ragged coat and fumbles for her keys in the darkness. At her pathetic signal the aristocracy of leaves will begin to let go.
I wanted to tell you about July 4th in northamerica and the lights computerized shrapnel in white or red or fast-fuse blue to celebrate the only revolution that was legitimate in human history I wanted to tell you about the baby screaming this afternoon where the park and the music of thousands who eat food and stay hungry or homicidal on the subways or the windowsills of the city came together loud like the original cannon shots from that only legitimate revolution in human history I wanted to tell you about my Spanish how it starts like a word aggravating the beat of my heart then rushes up to my head where my eyes dream Carribean flowers and my mouth waters around black beans or coffee that lets me forget the hours before morning But I am living inside the outcome of the only legitimate revolution in human history and the operator will not place my call to Cuba the mailman will not carry my letters to Managua the State Department will not okay my visa for a short-wave conversation and you do not speak English and I can dig it
A structure is rising. It takes on shape, it takes on meaning Where there was formless waste.Go down the valley, Eye of creation, sings the voice of the girl Through cloverfield.Green water is the spring of the year, Jade green in summer; autumn bright blue, for winter waterblack. The wall's detail, discrimination of blue Standing above the wall, where developing water Coils, sheathes, transforms itself turning, into light. Fusing of images and further change. Fire and music, interchangeable. Fusing of flow, dividing and further blue. There is control here, for all things in relation Find their offerings and give.A tendency toward life. The man at peace with his life and its flashing, A climax forest at peace with its fields. When the storms come, there is something in us That has always been ready to greet the storm. An impulse running through a valley of process Quickens the blossoming, whose orange on evening The fiery action of men and women emerges. And daughter-stars, daughter-forests of our range Dance with the central prince the dance of reign. We know the light incarnate, we have seen At last that the flashing is our old light, and flesh. Under stones, under leaves, under links of purpose, Appetite up so tall, the power is given Along the hillsides of risk, the spiral dances Within its own symmetry.But women, but men, but women And men in the dances and risks of birth In which love and the spirit are reborn. This also from lightning given and growing power. Lightning which is the word.The gift and power.Love.
Everything we dont understand is explained in Art The Sun beats inside us The Spirit courses in and out of us A circling transbluesency pumping Detroit Red inside, deep thru us like a Sea &amp; who calls us bitter has bitten us &amp; from that wound pours Malcolm Little by Little
High amid gothic rocks the altar stands that honored once a tippling fiercely joyous god. Far below, the empty convent lifts its cross against a dark invasive as the sun whose plangent fire moves like feathered snakes in trees that shade the cloister-garth. The curious may walk the cloister now, may enter portals barred to them no longer and wander hidden passageways and rooms of stone, meditating on such gods as they possess, as they have lost. Hollow cells are desolate in their tranquility as relic skulls. Arched windows there look toward the firegreen mountain resonant with silence of a conquered and defiant god.
This was a sudden break from plain routine as much a surprise as a new baby's strong grasp or a rake's late notion for the church. Elizabeth and Robert had not sat down to write together with the big watch between them on the deal table, since that tour of the fells seven years ago when Robert had been much taken with a remarkable and fine style of bootrack which they had chanced on at an inn. Ah, the heady days, with minds in utter engagement, mouths distorted in an ache of mutual beaming. But now this too was important, new and pleasurable like an unexpected jink in a straight path, or a glimpse of a fresh shade of pink in a spectrum grown dull. So much for the sitting down; now for the matter.
He is a good workman. It is enough to say. A man is his work and what a man is can you tell a tree The blood is a season like the running sap the root? memory coursing the round rings reach out restrain o cylinder of air grow leaf bough green gray the bark stays dark Three sit though the figure is one. The scene the Cafe Tabourey The time the night before All Soul's Day The year 1873. Dramatis personae: none masks? my face needs no enlargement it means exactly what I have said literally and completely, in all respects. my voice? I gave it hell to sound against. They do not hear. drama, no. I know no such accomodation. I am no longer an other. Je est. Three sit. That boy this man the Abyssinian. One. without ghost. 10. as platinum is. The clothes? bateau blue. The cheeks: pink hollow brown. Platinum eyes consult the red sea Space shroud and swaddle you wore. transcontinental blood of Indian girl beat of your dream. Fledged by the modern new Archeopteryx, you Hart Crane drank the poison as Crockett a cloud. Tall man's thirst. I remember your death, reject all answers. Noon, high time, at Orizaba stern you stood. In ecstasy of wake you who made a bridge leaped King Tching T'ang's inscription read: AXETREESUN The AXE to put away old habit New as the young grass shoot, wrote Kung, interpreting TREE Look to a constant renovation LOOK to as each new day look: the sun! on his bathtub: AXETREESUN
Over the branch of a small cherry, below the white flurry of blossoms, someone has looped a maroon sash. It seems somber, a marker maybe. Today the cherry trees are out throwing their white and pink confetti, tree after tree, on the people passing, and everyone has a half-smile, or a camera, or two cameras. Those not pointing at the children balanced on overhanging branches or the man at the easel painting a blur of trees at the water's curve are waiting their turn to compose the same arched branch, the same blossoms that erupt improbably across a gnarled, black trunk. Beyond the sash, which reaches and falls with each gust, stands a woman, back to the water, perilously close. She cups a fragile stem as she smiles at the man who waits for a moment when no one passes. The air is inhabited  her hair full of petals, his shoulders spattered and petals rise from the ground, eddy at their ankles and fall. Hold it. Hold it. Jefferson's dome's a brilliant bone, the blunt-nosed paddleboats swirling around, sky blue; the cherry trees are not yet green. And the sash someone might have found snaking in the grass by the sidewalk, the sash someone might have bent to retrieve, waits for its absent owner, a patient, unwavering presence against which the rest may be measured, against which the rest seems to move, though the sash moves too like an arm raised to gesture,
They are those that life happens to. They didn't ask to be born In those bleak farmsteads, but neither Did they ask not. Life took the seed And broadcast it upon the poor, Rush-stricken soil, an experiment In patience. What is a man's Price? For promises of a break In the clouds; for harvests that are not all Wasted; for one animal born Healthy, where seven have died, He will kneel down and give thanks In a chapel whose stones are wrenched From the moorland. I have watched them bent For hours over their trade, Speechless, and have held my tongue From its question. It was not my part To show them, like a meddler from the town, Their picture, nor the audiences That look at them in pity or pride.
Oh smiling-eyes and darling-heart;  I'm sitting at your feet; Who ever thought to find on earth  One so beguiling-sweet? I long to kiss your pretty hands,  My heart cries out aglow, I love you, love you, smiling-eyes   And goodness knows, it's so. Oh darling-heart and smiling-eyes  You're so bewitching-dear, I'd like to spend enchanted days  Just sitting by you here; My voice implore, ah, may I stay  And never, never go? You are so sweet, dear darling-heart,  I'm sure you will say no.
This is It and I am It and You are It and so is That and He is It and She is It and It is It and That is That. O It is This and It is Thus and It is Them and It is Us and It is Now and here It is and here We are so This is It.
The talk scared him. Left alone, with me, at some water. (Suddenness of your mind, because you will be saved. Stand there counting deaths. My own, is what I wanted you to say, Roi, you will die soon.) And it went well, till evening, and the birds fled. Their trees hanging empty at the river. All of it a creation. More than ideas. The simple elegant hand, a man will extend. More than we can lose, and still talk lovingly of &ldquo;ourselves.&rdquo; The brush sank behind its silence. This was a jungle, dead children of thought. We sat looking, and the wind changed our fire, it was blue, and sang slowly. Whose mind has this here? The way love will move. I love you, I say that now evenly, without emotion. Having lost you. Or sitting, at the ruptured threads of light. Wind and birds, spun out over the water, silent or dead.
Blue and dark Oh Bavarian gentians, tall ones make a dark-blue gloom in the sunny room. They have added blueness to blueness, until it is dark: beauty blue joy of my soul Bavarian gentians your dark blue gloom is so noble! How deep I have gone dark gentians since I embarked on your dark blue fringes how deep, how deep, how happy! What a journey for my soul in the blue dark gloom of gentians here in the sunny room! .... it is dark and the door is open to the depths. It is so blue, it is so dark in the dark doorway and the way is open to Hades. Oh, I know  Persephone has just gone back down the thickening thickening gloom of dark-blue gentians to Pluto to her bridegroom in the dark and all the dead and all the dark great ones of the underworld down there, down there down the blue depths of mountain gentian flowers cold, cold are gathering to a wedding in the [winter] dark down the dark blue path What a dark-blue gloom of gentians here in the sunny room!
Slant dark top of a chain-sawed tree stump with one white cotton glove spread on it: <> for the left hand of a woman. Or a girl, it is near a house where some girls live, and as we walk around it, along its walls and the walls of its sunken garden, thing after thing, squeezed beercans, cigarettes, a pair of white panties also cotton, stippled with mildew yellow green, boasting on its label One Size Fits All. No size fits one. It is a simple system we live in, brackish with familiar truths, water held too long in the mouth. In the sky snow that will fall. The flakes will sift through the bare arbor tangled with wisteria, will snag in the same landscape that caught gloves, cotton, a long violent purple scarf I found two weeks ago and set to dangle, eyesore, on a branch. Some one came back and wore it. This glove now, this missing hand, this emblem. For I saw my true love's blason cast down in colors, the dark was raining and her hand was pale with leaving.
The airmail from India, a weatherbeaten blue, with wax marks from the candle you had used to write by reached me. You write that reach is what travellers there do rather than arrive being more respectful to the gods of place. For years your letters from around the world have kept on reaching me wherever I'm hunched beside an atlas and a lamp. When you last saw me I was living in a room across the road from but a floor below the room we used to share ten years ago. Only kindness stopped you saying it took me quite some time to cross that road; and looking from my window I expect to see myself looking out to where in ten years time I'll be looking back again to see ... the last things you mention are the Parsee towers of silence where the dead are left for vultures to attend. I warm to that. It sort of brings things home.
<>  (Muse of soft lullaby and lisp&eacute;d rhyme)  Sing for my farewell song, who from this time Must steer my bark upon a stormier main. My sail is set. I know not if again  Under your shoreward boughs in Spring's sweet prime  I'll glide, or dream to the soft rippling chime The calm struck from my keel. Henceforth I strain My lyre to Life's profounder diapason:  The rhythm of ocean-waves o'erruns my strings  Of waves which over harbour-wall and bason  The flooding tide inevitably flings; On whose high crests new-freighted vessels hasten  To music of the wind's tempestuous wings.
Two months after retirement my father is here, to get away from 6 A.M. and his cup of empty destination. At a football game we huddle under his umbrella talking about the obvious. He brings me coffee to hold warm between my hands, a gift of no occasion. When we rise for the anthem I hear the rusty crack of his voice for the first time maybe ever. Thirty-three years of coughing thick factory air, of drifting to sleep through the heavy ring of machinery, of twelve-hour days. In my sleep I felt the cold bump of his late-night kiss. I shiver in the rain as my father sings me what now I hear as a children's song. I lean into him, the umbrella and rain my excuse, my shoulder against his, and I imagine my mother falling in love.
Lady, the glass you lift has sleep's bright fever in it, Amber and floating peace within a place Where he who drinks cannot expect to hear The throbbing of the skies, the watchful flight Of wings above his head, nor guide sea-traffic Through a crowded street. Lion, dog, or swine, He is a cheerful patient, Ready to give till he has nothing left to take  It is the fever that inspires his rosy look. Lady, you have that rosy look, Lips shaped as though about to speak, to sing; Is the fever hot or cold? Do eyelids close forever In the depths of the fever, And through the sky-borne arches do sea-bells ring? Whose are those delicate arms that reach to hold us Through plate-glass halls where glittering in mid-air The body rests, and each revolving mirror Reflects a sleeping mongrel at his ease? Is this the place of miraculous hotels, The forest feast embracing us with branches Where all the rosiest ladies turn to trees? Lady, your precious glass cannot tell time, But is of an hour that is forever gone; Even for your sake its light will not return, Nor farewells spoken with a gliding smile  Lady, our journey has outstepped your spell, We have destinations beyond your kind distractions: We have passed, are passing To the sober shores of hell; It is cold among the waters of the dead, A less feverish province than the animal kingdom That is always at your side. We have found no haven, And our long night has just begun, Though Hades opens like a winter sky; In darkness we are closer to the sun.&rdquo;
i shall go home today. i am not laughing my brain is done with dividing the hilarious from the humorous. i shall sit at this desk of sanity and never clean the curtained windows of a red room where decorated fingers punctured my intangible reflexes. i am quiet as the frail green recently promoted from her cell of frosts. i am calm as the spreading rain of spring paints new stripes toward reclaimed targets. O this white rain will flood the vacant rooms once leased by reserved apparitions. i shall go home today and all i require is tall boots before i disturb the grounded snow that alerts me.
It was perhaps no accident That drove me smash against this earth And caused friction just enough To fuse me with the planet's dust Which cannot leave this spatial sphere And thus, obeying law, binds me. It is as if there were one God In the universe, who, at the moment Of my birth, pinched my eyes to pin-points, And made me go blind through years; Who now, just now, has touched my sight To some vague opening; who says, &ldquo;It is a matter of indifference to me Whether you see more, or not.&rdquo; Thou, the Very Highest, who For loving me, didst spell oblivion In dust, and therein breathe my name.
At the end of summer they burn the house we live in. See the hooks of a change bigger than words clawing at the shut veins in the leaves. When the thieves come to scavenge I put your hand over my mouth not really a mouth. Only a bowl of fermenting yucca in the half coconut shell. Dear Mom, they've stolen my mouth from under her hand. Now they can burn everything. The winter seagulls are already at the guts of alien carrion. I don't recognize a thing. Supreme thieves are in the order of greater events: they leave a mythical confusion on which we build our next lives
In the chill murmur of the rain Venice exhales voices, like sighs from ancient air, trapped in bubbles in the ice cores of the north. &lsquo;From the heath- covered mountains of Scotia I come,&rsquo; pants a bottle of unfamiliar whisky, faintly from a window full of Dante olive oil. We follow a trail of drips across a bridge from a small berg of mozzarella carried by a cold-shouldered boy. These signs concern us, mark our passage as a breath on glass. At night we follow our hotelier past the shop of engravings: the figure in its window whispers &lsquo;I am the man who lanterns lights.&rsquo; Last winter he fished the lagoon. In the restaurant he led us to the end of a soft roll dipped in red wine becomes the curl of a rose, or a snail whose shell's colour confuses the thrush.
<>  Proof of persistent change, and prophecy,   Rapt in thy myths and monuments I see  Visions that throng thy soundless solitude: The pageant of a rumouring multitude,  The celebration and the mystery  Of occult and august Divinity  Sculptured in hieratic attitude;  Till I discern across the shadow of years  The self-same tragic life and death of men,  The passion and the pathos and the tears, The love and labour of humanity:  And know at last, tho' Time's abysmal sea  Divide us, yet we are not alien!
Heart, in the ardor of Whose holy day The June is blazing on our world of fruit and wheat, Smile on our lives, and sanctify them with a new love's vintage And with Your fires vivify our veins. Lo, the whole humble earth Bows and is broken with Your loads of bounty, and the trees Fail and give way as we besiege them with a score of ladders. We have no time to turn and hear the tiger-lilies all along the field, Whose outcry warns the world of Love's immense invasion Coming to crowd our continent with full-armed shocks. And look! Those regiments are all around us! How shall we flee you? You will 'siege us in our bursting barns And force us to a parley in our vines and garden. Lord, in this splendid season When all the things that grow extend their arms and show the world Your love, Shall the free wills of men alone Bide in their January ice And keep the stubborn winter of their fruitlessness? Why are we all afraid of love? Why should we, who are far greater than the grain Fear to fall in the ground and die? Have You not planned for minds and wills Their own more subtle biochemistry? This is the end of my old ways, dear Christ! Now I will hear Your voice at last And leave the frosts (that is: the fears) of my December. And though You kill me, (as You must) more, more I'll trust in you. For though the darkness and the furious waters of  that planting Seep down and eat my life away Yet my dark night both eats and feeds me, 'Til I begin to know what new life, green life springs within my bones. Heart, in the long, daily buryings of anguish and of prayer, Or when I seem to die on the dry burning stone, among the thorns, It is no longer I, but You Who work and grow: It is your life, not mine that makes these new green blades In the transforming of my soul. Oh, long before the June, if I but could I would begin to count my loads of grain, Hailing the hundreds of the heaven-harvests. But though they are not yet for man's accounting, Still in the planted earth I'll hold these hills of gold Between the blade and the green ear.
&lsquo;I'm having five minutes,&rsquo; he said, Fitting the shelter of the cobble wall Over his shoulders like a cape. His head Was wrapped in a cap as green As the lichened stone he sat on. The winter wind Whined in the ashes like a saw, And thorn and briar shook their red Badges of hip and haw; The fields were white with smoke of blowing lime; Rusty iron brackets of sorel stood In grass grey as the whiskers round an old dog's nose. &lsquo;Just five minutes,&rsquo; he said; And the next day I heard that he was dead, Having five minutes to the end of time.
Although I can see him still, The freckled man who goes To a grey place on a hill In grey Connemara clothes At dawn to cast his flies, It's long since I began To call up to the eyes This wise and simple man. All day I'd looked in the face What I had hoped 'twould be To write for my own race And the reality; The living men that I hate, The dead man that I loved, The craven man in his seat, The insolent unreproved, And no knave brought to book Who has won a drunken cheer, The witty man and his joke Aimed at the commonest ear, The clever man who cries The catch-cries of the clown, The beating down of the wise And great Art beaten down. Maybe a twelvemonth since Suddenly I began, In scorn of this audience, Imagining a man, And his sun-freckled face, And grey Connemara cloth, Climbing up to a place Where stone is dark under froth, And the down-turn of his wrist When the flies drop in the stream; A man who does not exist, A man who is but a dream; And cried, &lsquo;Before I am old I shall have written him one Poem maybe as cold And passionate as the dawn.&rsquo;
Sealed inside the anemone in the dark, I knock my head on steel petals curving inward around me. Somewhere the edict is given: petals, relax. Delicately they arch over backward. All is opened to me  the air they call  saline, dawngreen over its sands, resplendent with fishes. All day it is morning, all night the glitter of all that shines out of itself crisps the vast swathes of the current. But my feet are weighted: only my seafern arms my human hands my fingers tipped with fire sway out into the world. Fair is the world. I sing. The ache up from heel to knee of the weights gives to the song its ground bass. And before the song attains even a first refrain the petals creak and begin to rise. They rise and recurl to a bud's form and clamp shut. I wait in the dark.
Its hand goes on writing a letter without stopping, describes the ocean throwing up shovels of water like a gravedigger who never rests. Hard to imagine since we can only hold something in mind by finding a corner or crack, somewhere it stops and isn't. Like thinking about death. The ear's tiny seismograph is always writing, but to understand we must break up the account into segments, to hear the music.
Why was she weaving a shroud for Laertes and why have I thought for years it was a shawl she made, something warm a man might wrap around her shoulders windy nights one of the suitors, perhaps, much younger than she and younger far than Odysseus. Perhaps Laertes kept his eye on her suspiciously. Did she mean to finish it after all, unweaving less and less each night, and could that mean she wished Laertes dead? Yarns dyed the colors of the sea: greens, purples, and hyacinth. How can we hope to find the darker threads of her impatience or lust in the design of that nubby material? We make our myths from whole cloth anyway and make ourselves the heroines of others' imaginings. The shuttle was always moving back and forth across the loom, as restless as Odysseus himself, or any man. I think of the uses of &ldquo;shroud&rdquo;: how the night can be shrouded in fog in places like this one, near the sea; how leaves in summer shroud each mother branch; and how your husband's father looks at you with wrinkled lids shrouding those knowing eyes. What is faithfulness anyway? Penelope asks. Is the sea faithful to the shore, whether it beats against it or withdraws, leaving only a trace of its commandment on the naked sand? She wonders if Telemachus will find a wife to weave a shroud for her lost father-in-law, or would the water be winding sheet enough for him?
Autumn blows a withered hand on the velvet table to make us raise our heads, without touching them. Andrei Codrescu, age 65, is beyond taking an interest in it. He holds three aces and is going to die in fifteen minutes. Furious gales rip over the tall mountains, their ends held fast, the whip in the hand of a fat Chinese poet on his way to an ethereal mysterious archway over his head. His clothes are torn steam rises under him from the jade pool shredding his reflection. Inside the red gates meat and wine rise to warm lips.
Close to the dwelling of the dead,  on the left you will find a spring. Near it towers a white cypress. Avoid that source, do not  even try to approach it. It is the other spring that you need, surging from the lake of Mnemosyne,  a cold torrent. Before it stand guardians. Tell them, &lsquo;I am the child of earth  and the starry regions, but heaven is my home.  You know that already. Thirst burns in me,  I am dying from it. Let me taste the coldness  gushing from the lake of Mnemosyne.&rsquo; And they will let you drink  from the divine source, and you will come into dominion  among the heroes.
Here's to the mice that scare the lions, Creeping into their cages. Here's to the fairy mice that bite The elephants fat and wise: Hidden in the hay-pile while the elephant thunder rages. Here's to the scurrying, timid mice Through whom the proud cause dies. Here's to the seeming accident When all is planned and working, All the flywheels turning, Not a vassal shirking. Here's to the hidden tunneling thing That brings the mountain's groans. Here's to the midnight scamps that gnaw, Gnawing away the thrones.
Hard to imagine daffodils Where I see nothing but white veils Incessant falling of thick snow In this nowhere, non-landscape Which has no shadow and no shape, And holds me fast and holds me deep And will not cease before I sleep. Hard to imagine somewhere else Where life could stir and has a pulse, And know that somewhere else will be This very field, changed utterly, With hosts of daffodils to show That spring was there under the snow. New Englanders are skeptical Of what cannot depend on will, Yet I should know that this wide range Of white and green and constant change Have kept me kindled, on the edge of fear, Travelling the weather like a mountaineer.
the highway that feeds onto the Hollywood Freeway is itself fed (everything moving from right to left) by an even more crowded street where it all comes together a square yard of cinders from which stands up a vigorous palm I will believe in this, power of life to balance even in Jefferson's America whipped to its knees by the self-defeating local powers he allowed to men who crave the light too little &amp; the dense comforts of mortality too much. Jeff stares out from the penny stamp like a man watching hailstones flatten his corn  I give him this palm tree trusting at last in the earth to injure &amp; restore.
A siege of silence? Thy meaning-moving voice Hushed in the heart's crypt, thine eye Shut in unreckoning slumber  God? God? What storms of the dredg&egrave;d deep Your absence lets, the rock-croppage mind, Kelp-girthed, sunken under swell, All seas of the unislanded soul Typhooned, hurricaned to hell! God! God! A place of eels and octopuses Opens down under! Hell-stench Sulphurs the waters, the drench of madness Gags my plunged head! Death's belly rips! The Devil's ruptured fundament, Fawning with reechy kisses, Strokes my lips! God, to purge the memory pure What cautery is needful? To ease the soul of rancor, Quench its hate? God, God of the paradisal heart I wait!
Mean old murderous Leadbelly, Sugarland bound as sure as you're born, no longer buzzard lopes down Fannin Street with hat, tin can &amp; razor in hand in the company of another Jeffersonian, the one known to blues hounds, white cops &amp; redlight sisters as Blind Lemon. It was them yella women who finally ran the two of them outta Houston, they say, &amp; it was over that long overdue long green. Fannin Street acts like a boulevard now; skimpy skyscrapers, condos &amp; hospitals &amp; banks shadow its haunted, motorized length. Sugarland's no longer a catch-all prison; it's a high security suburb now, housing a brand new kind of convict: the managerial elite with some pro athletes thrown in. Neither Negro nor Jew nor White Folks sing or gather in its streets to celebrate or do much of anything except meet the Metro. Besides, there is no town downtown beyond rush hour. Only Montrose boasts of Street People &amp; the crime rate there is closely watched. Seriously, you'd have to hot tail it all the way back to when gasoline was 15 cents a gallon to find so much as a watermelon man or a hot tamale man or a strolling spasm band on Fannin Street. Even the hustling gals work out of XXX'd up stucco nudie joints now, like the one next door to the nursery school you bike past. But the KKK is still alive &amp; thriving. Christian born-againers still burn &amp; the fervor of their flaming return to fundamentals crisscrosses the topless pistol shot nights &amp; crackles the way lightning always splinters God's Country  with Texan Amurican splendor. Religious, political or not, the cops'll still gitcha if you don't watch out! They catch you acting too colored or not colored enough it's blam! You better not stagger &amp; you better not fight 'cause the only Miss Rosie you're liable to see won't be coming to bail nobody outta nowhere. As a matter of fact, chances are the umbrella on her shoulder &amp; that piece of paper in her hand will only mean she's doubling as Weather &amp; Anchor person tonight on the Six O'Clock News.
The poets are dying because they are told to die. What kind of dirt is that? Whose hand jiggles the nerve, what programme demands it, what death-train are we on? Not poetry: some of us drink, some take the wrong kind of walk or get picked up in canteens by killer lays   it's all tasteless to talk about. Taste is what death has for the talented. Then the civilization is filth, its taste the scum on filth. Then the poets are going to be moving on out past talent, out past taste. If taste gets its gift wrappers on death   well   out past that, too. There are courts where nobody ought to testify.
Belgrade moon, where are you now that I need you? I come into this town by way of Pisa, by way of Milano, by way of Zagreb &amp; all I run into are hustlers. A rose by any other name may be just as sweet, but so is a hustler to the smell: taxi drivers, hotel managers, bellboys, pariah of the tourist trade. Fifty bucks a night it's costing me to put up at the Hotel Jugoslavija in Bulevar Revolucije (revolution, my ass!) &amp; they treat me like the exploitative, privileged enemy I'm not &amp; never was &amp; all in the name of socialism. Maybe the doctrinaire Italian Communists are correct when they call Yugoslav communism <> The earthy part of me already knows this is probably as true as the sky of more than billowing clouds hanging all around this city's airport which I'm obliged to see circularly. All the loves of my tiny life hang in those clouds; loves I don't even know well yet: the flash &amp; gauzed-over flesh of love; the quintessential slivovic of love, the basic thing; the God-is-living-my-life-with-me gulp of love. I know no other way to put it, this notebooked love, this recognition. Wristwatch time doesn't quite get it. I'm talking about a land of tremendous beauty where Slavic essence is me. You got that, moon? You understand where I'm coming from? Where were you when I needed you to explain why I had so much trouble trying to push myself into a tomorrow I'm just now experiencing today? Green pastures, uncertain skies, I love you, come rain or shining moon.
Now the snow lies on the ground and more snow is descending upon it  Patches of red dirt hold together the old snow patches This is winter  rosettes of leather-green leaves  by the old fence and bare trees marking the sky  This is winter winter, winter leather-green leaves spearshaped in the falling snow
You who go out on schedule to kill, do you know there are eyes that watch you, eyes whose lids you burned off, that see you eat your steak and buy your girlflesh and sell your PX goods and sleep? She is not old, she whose eyes know you. She will outlast you. She saw her five young children writhe and die; in that hour she began to watch you, she whose eyes are open forever.
The ideal candidate for the position of soulmate to the all-important you should say she loves you, of her own volition, every five minutes, and it should be true. She must be motivated and ambitious but feminine. She will be good at art, at homely things. Her meals should be nutritious. The ideal candidate will win your heart with her prowess in bed. She will look stunning in public, turn at least ten heads per day. She should do most of (if not all) the running and be prepared for marriage straight away. Points will be lost for boring occupations, excessive mood swings, drugs and other men. To those who fail, your deep commiserations. This post will not be advertised again.
Oh, come, my lad, or go, my lad, And love me if you like. I shall not hear the door shut Nor the knocker strike. Oh, bring me gifts or beg me gifts, And wed me if you will. I'd make a man a good wife, Sensible and still. And why should I be cold, my lad, And why should you repine, Because I love a dark head That never will be mine? I might as well be easing you As lie alone in bed And waste the night in wanting A cruel dark head. You might as well be calling yours What never will be his, And one of us be happy. There's few enough as is.
A great room and a bowl full of roses, Red roses, a man as round as a ripe rose, Lying in a bowl of sun. And who supposes Such a sad weight could support such a gay pose. Flying his sad weight like a round baby's Petulant balloon! He has blue pebbles for eyes, Petulant, bewildered, innocent eyes like a baby's; Like a great baby or a clipped rose he lies In a white bowl of light in my memory; And expands his tenuous sweetness like a balloon; I shall die of feeling his dear absurdity So near me now, if I cannot cry soon. Keith was particularly Sunday morning, Red roses, old brandy, was unharrying Time, Was that white light, our youth; or was the fawning Zephyr that bobs the gay balloon of rhyme, He bobbed incredibly in our modern air; with his loose jacket, his white panama hat, As he leaned on his walking stick on the stone stair He seemed a balloon, moored down to the ground by that. As he leaned at the bar and ordered us pink gin Or arranged a flutter on the three-fifteen He seemed a child, incapable of sin: We never knew him prudent, cold, or mean. Or tied to the way the world works at all (Not even tied enough for poetry); All that he was we only may recall, An innocent that guilt would wish to be, A kind, a careless, and a generous, An unselfseeking in his love of art, A jolly in his great explosive fuss; O plethora of roses, O great heart!
Her clitoris the size of a Romanian pepper the feel of a leaf floating in silkworm drool drops from the past: food or money honey? Maria was from Somalia she worked on it a lot refined arabesque pausing only to educate her taste buds: a dwarf politico on a wave of kif surfed in with nymph &amp; satyr &amp; boy &amp; girl for each day of the week &amp; one or two young poets. In exchange she let him watch the tightening web his mosquito feet humming in the glue censor casting for a crew she would peel &amp; train &amp; ready to drown him. To me she said: &ldquo;I have only one enemy: MY THOUGHTS OF YOU&rdquo; I was young &amp; scared: &ldquo;Me?&rdquo; &ldquo;No,&rdquo; she said &ldquo;Not you. My thoughts of you your thoughts of me anybody's thoughts of her him &amp; it! Two thirds of my life I've been jailed ...&rdquo; she opened two black arms &amp; the wave grew &ldquo;... by thoughts of you when actual contact is shorter than this song&rdquo; She touched it &amp; it went bzzzzz hard &amp; long and the foreign army started to leave my brain I was a free man victim of electrocution as I spun down the road all sparks &amp; zigzags. The only woman I'm interested in is my mind I later wrote her
<> This long parenthesis of cosmic strife, This interlude, touched with the grandiose, Set in the uneventful tale of life. For then this human swathe, this bandaging That muffles us from the sublime was nigh Threadbare with taking part in, witnessing Too proximately God's grand strategy. There we marched out on haunted battle-ground, There smelled the strife of gods, were brushed against By higher beings, and were wrapped around With passions not of earth, all dimly sensed. There saw we d&aelig;mons fighting in the sky And battles in aerial mirage, The feverish V&egrave;ry lights proclaimed them by, Their tramplings woke our panting, fierce barrage. Their tide of battle, hither, thither driven, Filled earth and sky with cataclysmic throes, Our strife was but the mimicry of heaven's And we the shadows of celestial foes.
<> Prototypal Christ, pre-crucified pushing the invisible advance upon our pushes upon chaos. Discoverer and inventor, never let 'em say: &ldquo;Human nature cannot change.&rdquo; Institutor of fire's Sacrament and outward forms of conscious inner will; Prometheus!, Forethought of freedom (freedom for her and him; concrete, in that and this) Titan, tortured by the tyrant vulture whom Vulcan riveted as firmly as machines can rivet laborers to capital; Prometheus! O, let it never be said that the human of nature cannot change. Saul changed to Paul. All saints change man's nature, as men change nature's change. Show us in our own acts that we hear our supplication. Never a Saint is revered who was not reviled as a rebel. Every rebel, in so far prophet breeds holy doubt and skeptic faith in deeds' Melchizedekian Succession. While boom the double guns of Act and Word, mutating fire swims through the protestant blood of Christ, erect above your shadowed rock Prometheus! Our supine Crucifixion.
The next division of perfected men was the eleventh, and they hurled a flag in the air's faithful oblong, which, again, was bed and safety-net and showman. These  were the loyal. A rag of ill, unchosen colours, enemies or minor allies, differences in looks, rippled at an outpost, in a breeze of yesterday's malarial undead,  and horseflies in the nooks of continents were not the loyal. Said Witnesses: Such are the Fruits of This. And so they were. And of the fight a shed full of soldiers, still politenesses  between their Was and Is. Loyal indeed are apples to a yes, are animals to smells, are regulars to Old and Tried and what it takes to press the newly-found disloyal to the Square  under the tricolours to answer questions neither hard nor fair.
The gleaming head of one fine friend Is bent above my little song, So through the treasure-pits of Heaven In fancy's shoes, I march along. I wander, seek and peer and ponder In Splendor's last ensnaring lair  'Mid burnished harps and burnished crowns Where noble chariots gleam and flare: Amid the spirit-coins and gems, The plates and cups and helms of fire  The gorgeous treasure-pits of Heaven  Where angel-misers slake desire! O endless treasure-pits of gold Where silly angel-men make mirth  I think that I am there this hour, Though walking in the ways of earth!
A broken summit under sagging clouds: Earth-steam that drifts to merge with vaporous air And, like a jungle's pendant foliage, shrouds The wild beast sleeping in this rocky lair. His name is Fire. Famished, he lurks alone. His stout cave walls to sullen skies incline, Their aspiration, to a perfect cone, Cut cruelly by the crater's lateral line. Still as a painting now, these austere slopes Have seen this beast-god gulp up soil and houses, Whose long tongue licks to swallow human hopes When, drunk with his own anger, he carouses. But this archaic god could not daunt men: The villagers went back to build again.
Work out. Ten laps. Chin ups. Look good. Steam room. Dress warm. Call home. Fresh air. Eat right. Rest well. Sweetheart. Safe sex. Sore throat. Long flu. Hard nodes. Beware. Test blood. Count cells. Reds thin. Whites low. Dress warm. Eat well. Short breath. Fatigue. Night sweats. Dry cough. Loose stools. Weight loss. Get mad. Fight back. Call home. Rest well. Don't cry. Take charge. No sex. Eat right. Call home. Talk slow. Chin up. No air. Arms wide. Nodes hard. Cough dry. Hold on. Mouth wide. Drink this. Breathe in. Breathe out. No air. Breathe in. Breathe in. No air. Black out. White rooms. Head hot. Feet cold. No work. Eat right. CAT scan. Chin up. Breathe in. Breathe out. No air. No air. Thin blood. Sore lungs. Mouth dry. Mind gone. Six months? Three weeks? Can't eat. No air. Today? Tonight? It waits. For me. Sweet heart. Don't stop. Breathe in. Breathe out.
Fruit flies lift off the bowl of brown pears. The volume of the television is turned down. If you watch Christ raise Lazarus from the dead You will observe that he is always Upwind of him. The unfortunate Sisters are downwind With bags of cloves pushed to their faces. Olive trees, on the dry hillside, lean In these famous paintings, leaving the direction Of the wind not in question. Christ, if you believe the Italians, Was like most magicians  Clean and well positioned. It's summer, supper is finished Except for its odors. Before dusk begins There's an hour of strong light Which would never offend the religious. It's in this light That I look up at the bleached screen. There, in the silence, students fall before machines. It's as if they are the faint Of a mass healing. In a suburb of the city There is a mound of bodies which will be burned. In Tehran, if death is a woman, then her hem Will drag over the ground. But death Is that bearded man dressed in a black gown.
In the great northwest, always, my grandfather warned me, cold, and nothing but foreigners. Inexperienced dudes on trains, and their other luxuries like murder, and de-balling for the young girls, teaching them mambo-fear at tender age, for any bucks happen to make seventeen. We string them up or out. Along the reef of threatening waters. Call it success, and sit in a bar under eight layers of disease. Call it disappearance, that even the &ldquo;terrorists&rdquo; shave their heads and sound like Miles Standish. Where's it all leave me? A romantic liar, a coward, not even the courage to kill myself, or drink myself to death. Just be herded off like a common jew, and roasted in my teary denunciations. I'll go to jail and become a fag, write a huge treatise on religion, and never speak another english word. Roi, finish this poem, someone's about to need you. Roi, dial the mystic number, ask for holy beads, directions, plans for the destruction of New York. Work out your problems like your friends on some nice guy's couch. Get up and hit someone, like you useta. Don't sit here trembling under the hammer. Fate like a season of abstract reference. Like an abstract execution where only ideas are shot full of holes. Don't sit there drowned in your own bad writing Get up and throw that ball. Move your hips, cut, like the white boys, for ten more yards. Tackle and punch, then sit down grinning and waiting for some Barrymore to lick you clean. Get up and get high, so you wont understand what those gentlemen want, spying for months from the dope factory. Ask the white man for your passport and quit it, little jesus. Your time is up in this particular feeling. In this particular throb of meaning. Roi, baby, you blew the whole thing.
Twilight comes to the little farm At winter's end. The snowbanks High as the eaves, which melted And became pitted during the day, Are freezing again, and crunch Under the dog's foot. The mountains From their place behind our shoulders Lean close a moment, as if for a Final inspection, but with kindness, A benediction as the darkness Falls. It is my fiftieth year. Stars Come out, one by one with a softer Brightness, like the first flowers Of spring. I hear the brook stirring, Trying its music beneath the ice. I hear almost, I am not certain  Remote tinklings; perhaps sheepbells On the green side of a juniper hill Or wineglasses on a summer night. But no. My wife is at her work, There behind yellow windows. Supper Will be soon. I crunch the icy snow And tilt my head to study the last Silvery light of the western sky In the pine boughs. I smile. Then I smile again, just because I can. I am not an old man. Not yet.
about a violin maker who thinks craft is the most important thing  the arching, the shape, the mixing of the varnish? His favorite time in history, the time he would like to go back to, is when Stradivari was alive. You, the poet, will have to reveal the troubled soul of this man, whose violins are not as good as Stradivari's. Even though he uses his best techniques, always, something is missing. He asks everyone who comes to his shop, &ldquo;Which is more important, the power or the tone?&rdquo; He already knows the answer, but he keeps asking, for the answer he wants to hear is,  power for the requiems, mellowness for chamber music. You, the poet, must also mention the fact that the violin is shaped like a woman. This will be hard to do. People will say, &ldquo;How trite.&rdquo; Their minds will wander off. &ldquo;A clich&eacute;,&rdquo; they will remark, yawning. But you must be resolute and remember that Beethoven, too, had a flaw: syphilis. &ldquo;I suffer from the sins of my youth,&rdquo; he wrote in a letter. Syphilis is the symbol for mortality. Disease in general stands for that, if it doesn't signify war, corruption, or dust. The dimensions of a symbol are enormous. And you can take advantage of that, of course you can, although you'll have to figure out how to describe so much potency ... and while you are thinking, the poem may decide to proceed on its own. Talking, gesturing with its hands, it might tell more lies (that part about Beethoven wasn't true), and suddenly, this poem may drape cloth of gold over your own doorway. It may install silver stoves in your kitchen to warm the air. It may sink stars in all your mirrors, fog in the bureaus, amethysts in the wineglasses  and in general, take advantage of the situation by ordering dinners for fifty as helicopters land on lawns, bringing people you have almost forgotten, bringing also jeweled thimbles, red and pink silk from India, accompanists, and reminders of streets such as Bassani's &ldquo;Corso Giovecca, so broad and open.&rdquo;
Up on this stringed possibility no hand could interrupt itself in the phlya of music to work a lesser work than I hear you&point;wherever you are come out I see you. This is stringed emptiness, the pegs do not turn, the frets are random, the soundbox opens into tomorrow only, hurry to hear this now hurry to be. <> when I was a child a book of Shakespeare showed a woman breaking a fat-bellied mandolin over a fat man's head <> And they look on&point;who hear us all ways, who rise to attend what rises in us to attend them.
As all things pass and as everything in time becomes abstract, a quick look around tells you that whatever limits you construct contract so that soon you notice the walls closing in and the sandy surface unsettling beneath you. In effect the motion is like the little whirlpool formed by a basin as it drains, and if you maintain enough self-control you can sometimes hear the gurgling sound, insidious and obliviously inhuman. The day comes when there is not even an in - stant  only a vacuum, a falling sensation, which can precede feelings of freedom, as a corpse cut down from a scaffold crumples to the earth, or as wind roaring out of a canyon discovers itself sweeping the plain. And so perhaps there is some substance accumulating out of ourselves, even as we are aware of losing our grip, and a final balance is arrived at incorporating the passage of time and laws like gravity, an impassive recompense, the pliable beauty given the wave-beaten and wind-driven sands.
You stand before the dark Wet night of leaves In glasses and a witty hat With a tropical guitar, And the white crumpled Clothes of sugar countries. So droll, to be the mad Saint of a hot republic! You smile in a mist of years Where your country has placed you To think about the paper You hold in your hand: For critical services At some unrecorded time The Nation awards you This empty room. Have you noted in cryptograms Upon the tiny white leaf Some fortunate index, Some sign of the age? Or do you announce A central tumult Out of reach of their patrols? No, you stand still And you begin to smile As you read rainbows On the empty paper.
Disguised as an Arab, the bouzouki player introduces her as Fatima, but she's blond, midwestern, learned to move we suspect in Continuing Education, Tuesdays, some hip college town. We're ready to laugh, this is Aspen Colorado, cocaine and blue valium the local hard liquor, and we with snifters of Metaxa in our hands, part of the incongruous that passes for harmony here. But she's good. When she lets her hair loose, beautiful. So we revise: summer vacations, perhaps, in Morocco or an Egyptian lover, or both. This much we know: no Protestant has moved like this since the flames stopped licking their ankles. Men rise from dinner tables to stick dollar bills where their eyes have been. One slips a five in her cleavage. When she gets to us she's dangling money with a carelessness so vast it's art, something perfected, all her bones floating in milk. The fake Arabs on bongos and bouzouki are real musicians, urging her, whispering &ldquo;Fatima, Fatima,&rdquo; into the mike and it's true, she has danced the mockery out of that wrong name in this unlikely place, she's Fatima and the cheap, conspicuous dreams are ours, rising now, as bravos.
<> And then away, away the shufflers go Aft to the darkness where the ruler dwells, Where by the rail he sucks his pipe aglow; Beside him his relief looks down on those below. There in the dark they answer to their names, Those dozen men, and one relieves the wheel, One the look-out, the others sit to games In moonlight, backed against the bulkhead's steel, In the lit patch the hands flick, card by card, the deal. Meanwhile the men relieved are forward all, Some in their bunks asleep, while others sing Low-voiced some ditty of the halliard-fall, The ship impels them on with stooping wing, Rolling and roaring on with triumph in her swing.
Somewhere it is about to snow, if not in the northern suburbs, then in the west, if not there, then here. And the wind which is camouflaged now by the perfect stillness of trees will make some weathercock dizzy with its fickle breath. In the blood's failing heat we wait for the verdict of snow. You bite into an apple with the sound boots make crunching through the first icy layers. The whites of your eyes are cold. The moons of your nails are frozen mounds. A single match striking against the bottom of a shoe is our only prayer.
How strange it is to walk alone, the one leg never growing tired of the other; the ears still beautiful but the sound falling in new places; all that I formerly believed in explained and sweetened. I have to concoct my own past now out of old inhalations. I have to live in two lives with the same blood. I have to separate the thirsts without hatred. It is a good desert  snakes and horses  cooks, whores, doctors  ghosts, vistas, women and men of all sizes and all ages living together, without satire.
After the test they sent an expert questioner to our school: &ldquo;Who is this kid Bohr?&rdquo; When Bohr came in he asked the expert, &ldquo;Who are you?&rdquo; and for a long time they looked at each other, and Bohr said, &ldquo;Thanks, I thought so.&rdquo; Then they talked about why the test was given. Afterwards they shook hands, and Bohr walked slowly away. He turned and called out, &ldquo;You passed.&rdquo; Enough sleet had pasted over the window by three o'clock so we couldn't tell if it was dark  and our pony would be out there in the little shed waiting to take us home. Teacher banked the stove with an extra log. That was the storm of 1934. For two days we waited, singing and praying, and I guess it worked, even though the snow drifted over the roof. But the pony was dead when they dug us out. At a tiny desk inside my desk, a doll bends over a book. In the book is a feather found at the beach, from a dead gull. While Miss Leonard reads &ldquo;The Highwayman,&rdquo; I bend over my book and cry, and fly all alone through the night toward being the person I am.
The road unwinds like a bandage. These are the benchmarks: A letter from Yucatan, a ball, The chairs of the underlife. Descent is a fact of speech, A question of need lampblack, cold-drill, A glint in the residue: Dante explained it, how It bottoms out, becoming a threshold, The light like a damp confetti, The wind an apostrophe, the birds Stone bone in the smooth-limbed trees. Mums in a vase, flakes in a hope chest: Father advise us, sift our sins  Ferry us back and step down; Dock at the Clinchfield Station: Our Lady of Knoxville reclines there On her hard bed; a golf club Hums in the grass. The days, dry cat tracks, come round, A silence beneath the leaves: The way back is always into the earth. Hornbeam or oak root, the ditch, the glass: It all comes to the same thing: A length of chain, a white hand.
In this tenement of headstones, the dead jostle each other underground in a perpetual rush hour, thigh bone to thigh bone. Holding my breath I drive by, dreaming of cremation, of ashes rising on their stems of smoke to flower in the empty spaces between stars.
I know the face of Falsehood and her tongue Honeyed with unction, plausible with guile, Are dear to men, whom count me not among, That owe their daily credit to her smile; Such have been succoured out of great distress By her contriving, if accounts be true: Their deference now above the board, I guess, Discharges what beneath the board is due. As for myself, I'd liefer lack her aid Than eat her presence; let this building fall: But let me never lift my latch, afraid To hear her simpering accents in the hall, Nor force an entrance past mephitic airs Of stale patchouli hanging on my stairs.
Some days before death  When food's tasting sour on my tongue, Cigarettes long abandoned,  Disgusting now even champagne; When I'm sweating a lot  From the strain on a last bit of lung And lust has gone out  Leaving only the things of the brain; More worthless than ever  Will seem all the songs I have sung, More harmless the prods of the prigs,  Remoter the pain, More futile the Lord Civil Servant  As, rung upon rung, He ascends by committees to roofs  Far below on the plain. But better down there in the battle  Than here on the hill With Judgement or nothingness waiting me,  Lonely and chill.
Green bearded Arthur with his men still blinking from underground wars Comes crawling out of the ivy. They fumble With their weapons. Gather at the federal table A party of ancient hoods Nodding in the blue shadow Pirates waiting for the new raids. Infernal smoke Fills Washington and Camelot And ashes cut the sight of red-eyed intelligence. Now Patria sets her stone vision Toward the computer castles in the vortex; Is critical of mist; She alarms the police And points a solid marble finger In a general direction: (&ldquo;There, in the Far East, are the malefactors!&rdquo;) The granite nation is ugly now But firm, consoled By a coat of rhetoric And soil of pigeons. Local songs call guards to order. The earth shakes. Will all the concrete Stagger and fall? Or will these armed phantoms Swim death's ocean and win? Win what? The earth shakes. The war is busy in the underground And hell is ready in the submarines.
The frost has settled down upon the trees And ruthlessly strangled off the fantasies Of leaves that have gone unnoticed, swept like old Romantic stories now no more to be told. The trees down the boulevard stand naked in thought, Their abundant summery wordage silenced, caught In the grim undertow; naked the trees confront Implacable winter's long, cross-questioning brunt. Has some hand balanced more leaves in the depths of the  twigs? Some dim little efforts placed in the threads of the  birch?  It is only the sparrows, like dead black leaves on the  sprigs, Sitting huddled against the cerulean, one flesh with their  perch. The clear, cold sky coldly bethinks itself. Like vivid thought the air spins bright, and all Trees, birds, and earth, arrested in the after-thought, Awaiting the sentence out from the welkin brought.
The ramparts are howling. The sun reeks of sweat. Under the olives cicadas are seasoning the afternoon. The boy on the Vespa unfastens his shorts. (A lizard skitters away.) The solider his place in fact the more he quivers in the haze. The smell of him in saturated cloth evaporates. When he opens his mouth he has nothing to say. He wallows in the dust like a dog with an itch. His muscular thighs are sweating like cheeses left out in the sun.
Deep in the still mysterious waters of the lake a world lies  drowned. How sombre and sad the silent world in the womb of the lake, Not the reflection of Tellus, not the arch of heaven Lies in the waters of the abominable lake, But an earth and a heaven beyond the dominion of Time, Beyond the soft sensual touch of the seasonal flow And the inviolable sequence of midnight and noon. Poor world, my heart breaks for your sealed inarticulate woe, And the tears that are frozen in yours melt to flood in my eyes, Overflow and descend and impinge on the waters of the lake And shatter at once the form of the silent world. But the teardrops mingle, the waters shudder and close, And again and again the sad world is revealed to my sight. Then I know, and the knowledge transfixes my sensitive heart, Not my tears, nor my prayers, nor my gold shall encompass  at last A freedom unthought, manumission unhoped, undesired.
Will you eat water melon Or drink lemonade Beside San Miniato This hot twilight Arno blurring in its white dry cobbled bed Wine honey olive oil Fill the air with their secret vapors And a black potter Treads treads treads Her wheel shaping a pot With a template cut from your flesh Lovers whimper in the dusk We are lost do you hear We are all lost As the hundred bells break And the stars speak
Ever again to breathe pure happiness, So happy that we gave away our toy? We smiled at nothings, needing no caress? Have we not laughed too often since with Joy? Have we not stolen too strange and sorrowful wrongs For her hands' pardoning? The sun may cleanse, And time, and starlight. Life will sing great songs, And gods will show us pleasures more than men's. Yet heaven looks smaller than the old doll's-home, No nestling place is left in bluebell bloom, And the wide arms of trees have lost their scope. The former happiness is unreturning: Boys' griefs are not so grievous as youth's yearning, Boys have no sadness sadder than our hope.
The light goes: that once powerful sun, That held all steeples in its grasp, Smokes on the western sea. Under the fruit tree summer's vanishing residuum, The long accumulation of leaf, Rots in the odor of orchards. Suddenly the dark descends, As on the tule ponds at home the wintering blackbirds, Flock upon flock, the thousand-membered, In for the night from the outlying ploughlands, Sweep over the willows, Whirled like a net on the shadowy reeds, All wings open. It is late. And any boy who lingers on to watch them come in Will go hungry to bed. But the leaf-sunken years, And the casual dusk, over the roofs in a clear October, Will verify the nameless impulse that kept him out When the roosting birds and the ringing dark Dropped down together.
In a hand like a bowl Danced my own soul, Small as an elf, All by itself. When she thought I thought She dropped as if shot. &lsquo;I've only one wing,&rsquo; she said, &lsquo;The other's gone dead,&rsquo; &lsquo;I'm maimed; I can't fly; I'm like to die,&rsquo; Cried the soul From my hand like a bowl. When I raged, when I wailed, And my reason failed, That delicate thing Grew back a new wing, And danced, at high noon, On a hot, dusty stone, In the still point of light Of my last midnight.
How hungry and for what are the people this season predicting the end of the end of the end of I've only just come home after having been away The world sends its greetings and the greetings send greetings Hello goodbye, hello goodbye There are greetings and gifts everywhere Children screaming and feeling slighted The next minute we're walking along canals on the planet Mars Twenty minutes later we are earthworms in black leather jackets, our pockets filled with hamburgers, Voyage to the moon. All I am really hungry for is everything The ability to hibernate and a red suitcase going off everywhere Every cell in your body and every cell in my body is hungry and each has its own stomach Are your cells eating my cells? Whose cell is the universe, and what is it sick with, if anything? Is the universe a womb or a mouth? And what is hunger, really? And is the end of the world to be understood in terms of hunger or gifts, or the tops of peoples' heads coming off? The most complex dream I've ever dreamed I dreamed in London. It involved in its entirety taking one bite of an orange. &ldquo;What do you want to be when you grow up?&rdquo; she says. I'm nearly sixty. I want to be hungry as I am now and a pediatrician. The truth is I'm 45 and hungrier than I was when I was 20 and a sailor. I'm hungry for ice cream made with ice cream and not chemicals or artificial spoons. I've never been so hungry in my life. I want one more bacon-lettuce-and-tomato sandwich, to make love and kiss everyone I know goodbye. Tomorrow at half past four we will all four-and-a-half billion of us walk slowly into orbit. If only one can do this breathing normally, and not trip on one's breath or have stomach cramps or clammy hands or hysterical needs or a coughing fit or the wish to trample or stomp someone, but stepping peacefully There is ALL the time in the world There is ALL THE TIME IN THE WORLD There is all the time in the world.
So she moved into the hospital the last nine days to tend him with little strokes and murmurs as he sank into the sheets. Nurse set out a low bed for her, night-times, next to his. He nuzzled up to her as she brushed away the multiplying cells with a sigh, was glad as she ignored the many effluents and the tang of death. The second last morning of his life he opened his eyes, saying, &lsquo;I can't wake up&rsquo; but wouldn't close them for his nap until he was sure she was there. Later he moved quietly to deeper sleep, as Professor said he would, still listening to her twittering on and on until the last.
Now from a stout and more imperious day Let dead impatience arm me for the act. We bear too much. Let the proud past gainsay This tolerance. Now, upon the sleepy pact That bound us two as lovers, now in the night And ebb of love, let me with stealth proceed, Catch the vow nodding, harden, feel no fright, Bring forth the weapon sleekly, do the deed. I know and having seen, shall not deny  This flag inverted keeps its colour still; This moon in wane and scooped against the sky Blazes in stern reproach. Stare back, my Will  We can out-gaze it; can do better yet: We can expunge it. I will not watch it set.
Now we have buried the face we never knew, Now we have silenced the voice we never heard, Now he is dead we look on him with awe ... Dead king, dear martyr, and anointed Word. Where thousands followed, each must go home Into his secret heart and learn the pain, Stand there on rock and, utterly alone, Come to terms with this burning suffering man; Torn by his hunger from our fat and greed, And bitten by his thirst from careless sloth, Must wake, inflamed, to answer for his blood With the slow-moving inexorable truth That we can earn even a moment's balm Only with acts of caring, and fierce calm. Head of an African, vital and young, The full lips fervent as an open rose, The high-domed forehead full of light and strong  Look on this man again. The blood still flows. Listen once more to the impassioned voice Till we are lifted on his golden throat And trumpet-call of agony and choice Out of our hesitating shame and doubt. Remember how he prayed before the task. Remember how he walked, eyes bright and still, Unarmed, his bronze face shining like a mask, Through stones and curses, hatred hard as hail. Now we have silenced the voice we never heard, Break open, heart, and listen to his word.
The closer the bone the sweeter the bite: Among dark thoughts of slips between Cups and lips, afternoon meets night In the shadowed Hopper picture window (Shrouded in analgesic light) Which the woman in the white traveling dress Traverses, nervous, with red tortoiseshell shades. She stops to consider coffee. She kills her cigarette and raises To her red lips a man's black china mug Emblazoned, in a bow-tie lariat script, &ldquo;No Regrets,&rdquo; by decal. The motel dims Into the perfidy of saffron electrical dusk With the entry of a second figure, A hatless man in a plain dark suit Who does something mysterious with his hands. Emotional balances perceptibly shift At this point, like the inside parts of a lock Coaxed toward their decision. He bends. She goes back across the room again Making snowy egrets glide Under her. Do these people know They are part of a story that tumbles Abruptly forward now, pitching Them forty-two years into a future That is framed on the wall of memory's sad Museum? Night, the light-rustler, Comes on in a soft crushing agitation Of blue neon fruit against the Cadmium orange sky. What Goes up must come down. But who are they? Why were they born?
Jellyfish washed up like small blue parachutes but it was the silent fishing of cranes that signaled another time had begun, another world. I walked to the clam bed with bucket and pitchfork and before the sun had fallen we had steamers and Black Point darkened slowly, layer upon layer. The temperature dropped into the fifties; how easily we fell into that smug summer sleep of people vacationing in the north. One July, though, out of love with each other, we played Frisbee, perfecting the sidearm, the between-the-legs. In bed we did it this way, then that, sad masters of technique. Then a crane dragged its damaged leg into the tall reeds, snapped and hissed when we got near, would not let itself be saved. In the morning we found its neck ripped  a weasel's work, pure mischief, and we felt, no, we were sure nothing we did or didn't do could have changed a thing.
A census of tears and a thermometer: a legacy. Windows open. The old man's harvest, parched in his eyes. Laughter as a fringe benefit of his endurance. A world of parity in clasped hands. A bid whist tournament: chitlins on cornbread. As consolation prize. Memory.
I wonder who has pissed here and stared like me at those wild petunias or touched a purple leaf from that small pear tree. Has anyone lain down here beside those red peppers or under those weak elm withers standing in shame there? Dear god of that grape, has anyone snapped off a little curlicue to see if it's wood or wire or stripped the bark off those thick vines and leaned against that broken fence? Has anyone put some old parsley in his mouth to see what the taste is or lifted a rose mum to his face to see if he'll live forever?
He too was a light sleeper once. A chuckle in the hall, the pulse in the neck of a bird that felt like his own, a bloodred beak in a lime tree, a nightmare prince, anything at all could wake him to coffee and a mountain-climb of words on a page. But now, after sudden jail and long exile, fruitbats in his family tree, marriage of his heart's little bird to a clawing cat, cigarette burns on children's most private parts, and the daily caw at the window of quarrelling carrion birds, he just turns, champs a curse in his jaw as he gathers his heap of limbs to climb again to other slopes of sleep, the iron taste of print in his mouth.
<> At Lingard, and anon rapped eagerly: &ldquo;When earth is cold and there is no more sea, There will be what was Lingard. Otherwise, Why lure the race to ruin through the skies? And why have Leffingwell, or Calverly?&rdquo;  &ldquo;I wish the ghost would give his name,&rdquo; said he; And searching gratitude was in his eyes. He stood then by the window for a time, And only after the last midnight chime Smote the day dead did he say anything: &ldquo;Come out, my little one, the stars are bright; Come out, you l&aelig;laps, and inhale the night.&rdquo; And so he went away with Clavering.
Think of it as a target's outer edge  the bands of lawn, gravel, lawn, the red brick bull's-eye of the house. Dead center was the kitchen, whose windows opened a view of the yard, the trees and bushes newly planted, each in its small depression, and the more ambitious birds  cardinal, blue jay, mockingbird  tagging the older trees beside the fence. Along one flank of the yard, that meant mimosa, a pink canopy, silk blossoms shaped like downy parasols; and it was here she taught herself to move beyond the branches onto the edge, inching down the planks around the house. When she fell she fell inward, away from the field. But once in the air and moving forward, she was neither in the yard nor in the field, balanced over hay and broom, the dried plates of dung and piles still liquid, green as infection, the hidden nests of snakes or rabbits, and the obvious cows, wearing their stockings of offal, lurching and switching. How easily the world was once divided. In the field the doves cried in their private tunnels of grass, and beyond, her father's pasture gave way to woods and creek, the high trestle, someone else's woods and creek. She knew who was supposed to be the sun, who the moon, who the pebble under the skirt of the moon. By summer's end, doubling her own height she'd traced the whole decorative length of wood around the house to the corner by the road where fence was used to keep things in, not out. And that is how I see her even now  not yet straining against a tether but held erect by the gravitational pull from either side  face forward, arms extended, headed for the far post where wood turned into wire.
I dreamed that in a city dark as Paris I stood alone in a deserted square. The night was trembling with a violet Expectancy. At the far edge it moved And rumbled; on that flickering horizon The guns were pumping color in the sky. There was the Front. But I was lonely here, Left behind, abandoned by the army. The empty city and the empty square Was my inhabitation, my unrest. The helmet with its vestige of a crest, The rifle in my hands, long out of date, The belt I wore, the trailing overcoat And hobnail boots, were those of a  I was the man, as awkward as a bear. Over the rooftops where cathedrals loomed In speaking majesty, two aeroplanes Forlorn as birds, appeared. Then growing large, The German  They chased each other tumbling through the sky, Till one streamed down on fire to the earth. These wars have been so great, they are forgotten Like the Egyptian dynasts. My confrere In whose thick boots I stood, were you amazed To wander through my brain four decades later As I have wandered in a dream through yours? The violence of waking life disrupts The order of our death. Strange dreams occur, For dreams are licensed as they never were.
<> <> John Waller Spending the afternoon with Waller's loves, Which he calls poems, I took pleasure in Tracing ancestral echoes of a smooth Plausible ghost, the elegant and thin Clear lute of Edmund; Edmund's lovely rose In John's pale garden lit a twilight air ... Edmund was tricky and political, And so is John. That's neither here nor there, For who remembers Waller's Plot? Or who The General, that other ancestor, &lsquo;Waller the Conqueror,&rsquo; who always lost His larger battles in the Civil War? And love was war for them, a garden war: Whatever rose we pluck, the thorn has pricks. So, too, in Edmund's time, they died from love Between their battles and their politics. And one recalls the ancient trimming rogue  &lsquo;The soul's dark cottage, battered and decayed&rsquo;  Having his joke with the sardonic Charles: &lsquo;Not truth, but fiction, is the poet's trade.&rsquo; &lsquo;Waller was smooth: but Dryden taught to join&rsquo;  How does Pope say? &lsquo;the long resouding line.&rsquo; And in a rough age smoothness pleases more With flies in amber, and with sops in wine, With girls, with roses. With a fiction. Now, Reading John's lines with an oppressive heart And knowing in them all the truth of fact, I cannot judge them for the truth of art, And think that Edmund with his Sacharissa Perhaps was more sincere than we allow. To know the poet and the person too Is stupefying to the critic now. &lsquo;Tell her that wastes her time and me,&rsquo; alas! Or tell a Time that wastes itself and us How all the real and daily deaths we die Are mortal, but they are not amorous!
Man, simple and brave, easily confiding, Giving his all, glad of the sun's sweetness, Heeding little of pitiful incompleteness, Mending life with laughter and cheerful chiding, Where is he? I see him not, but I hear Sounds, charged with nothing but death and maim-  ing; Earth and sky empty of all but flaming Bursts, and shocks that stun the waiting ear; Monsters roaring aloud with hideous vastness, <>  them Mightier far than himself, has stooped, and obeyed  them, Schooled his mind to endure its own aghastness, Serving death, destruction, and things inert,  He the soarer, free of heavens to roam in, He whose heart has a world of light to home in, Confounding day with darkness, flesh with dirt. Oh, dear indeed the cause that so can prove him, Pitilessly self-tested! If no cause beaconed Beyond this chaos, better he bled unreckoned, With his own monsters bellowing madness above him.
What are you doing today, brother? Where is your face that no one sees it? Where is your death that no one dies it? <> <> Under the sharp leaves In the lean shadows Kiss now your home-grown Judas Beneath the bleeding root Above the rotten branch Kindles the evening star of anger <> <> The originating brow of poetry Made to squat like an epilogue at the beginning of a fool's play.
<>  And we will bide in silence, Thou and I;  Within the choir&egrave;d poem of the sky  Thine is the voice I cannot understand. Give me thy hand and let the heart command:  My mind is blurred, and yet I seem to know  Darkly what men have spoken of, and now  The Word itself their lips have never spanned, Nor I shall ever speak it, nor shall they  That illustrate to-morrow with their birth;  The tongue is tethered we can just obey; And from the gates of sunrise issue dumb,  Illumined while the spirit of the earth  Reveals her secret, knowing we have come.
<> Has clothed the little village in a dream Of stillness, and the crazy, muffled bell Swings high and low, and high again to tell The hour as through the aged gate That creaks, and hangs a little bit awry Upon its rusty hinges, there pass by The older folk we used to know. They seem Saddened and quiet, different and shy! The church door opens and the light Pours out upon them and envelopes all In its soft beam of ancient kindliness. The tiny organ seems, somehow, to bless The night to talk of God. And in the song are all the olden things We love the touch of silver angels' wings, The sound of holy voices in the night. Oh, to go on and in with them, to feel Within, like burning wine, new faith, to kneel Before the altar of our memories! But they have passed, and with a sigh, we see Like some huge loneliness, our mangled creed Looming above and what we loved before Fades dim before the things that we believe! The sleet beats down, unmercifully cold, The path is dark see, they have closed the door.
No wind in all that place. Only the sun beating down. Like sleepy cats we moved within the shade. And when I touched him Such a thrill went through my arm And ceased where my ring was ... It left me tingling ... The air was so full charged Of the electric force, It overflowed in mystic flare. Pale blue, it dazed the sky Pale blue And vast It challenged all the sky. In the evening A small chill wind Brought back the moisture to our veins of wilted flowers. The rain came Swarming. Challenging the night the western sky lights up Thundering. And all the sky is in a flare With all the winds And all the stars Rushing ... And the rain Swarming. The moon Mad queen of the earth, Walks in the pools, On the bridge's edge The raindrops burst in spray Dancing.
One was put under the tide,  And seven were widowed here  No tumult battered the gate,  No watchman spoilt with beer. The mist shower came like a net  Thrown in a moment down By a grey, light-handed thief  From Foel to Frenni Fawr. Its myriad-mesh was thrown  And swift was the tedious wonder  With their magic, with their language,  Seven cantrefs went under. No tumult battered the gate  But homes were ravaged here. On the seashore, where, O where  Are the boats of the sons of Ll&ycirc;r? When the light cleared at last  There was neither fort nor fane. As wretched were the seven  As the far uncertain plain  The prairie that hears no speech,  And sees no one go by But sun and moon and stars  Along a windy sky. Two orphans of the land  Weeping at all that woe  &lsquo;Let's leave it now,&rsquo; he says.  To England, off they go.
Vaguely at first, then firmly, The beach extended west Of our sandpit. That point, then, Was not the last. A mile more and we found The broken blockhouse wall From nineteen-forty, arm-thick Firing cable Shredding into surf. Oddly archaic, those Batteries untested, Greenish fuzz Bearding the rifle platforms Offshore, concrete stripped And draining rhythmically In the tide's beat While the line floated one daub Of zinc white over slate, The Cape Lewes Ferry sliding Cleanly from sight. It was our idleness Slow as that whitening day That held us. But through haze Burning away, A fat man being tugged By his paunchy dog, and tanning Women finding sleep, And our girl running, These held through more than distance, For that shore was a shore No one can now extend To any future, The margin that had gone Unfired on, the last edge Behind which houses waited Without damage  World to which men returned. Archaic, it cleared through air And we had walked into it, Whole. We were there.
When song falls I lean against its flight as at the end of a long volume: Dead as song musters, it is not light with you:Often you might assume it cares whether you tweak clear-headed in the dark or cut a great annunciation: Poor one, poor one it has nothing to do with desire:if a burst of sight supports it is there,  where two strangers might advance, neither certain of the other's waking
Even in last effects there is music, paired membranes of hands, packing their music,  in their history they discover these moments, packing, the meal in their quiet evenings, membranous hands, paired, loving membranes touching <> Fog of summer these effects toughen; they touch your lives, calloused, out of use, in rage, and their softening, <>
your man is long gone, and I have loitered by your garden gate; weeded the border, turned the soil over, waited on your word. There is a quilt or sheet or counterpane strung out across a tenterframe; by day you make it, sitting in the window seat. And you have crossed your heart and hoped to die, promised that this cover, blanket, bedspread, when completed, will envelop me with you. Penelope, one night last June I came for fruit, and from the crow's nest of the cherry tree I made you out: unhitching one day's stitching, teasing knot from thread, releasing warp from weft ... I dropped down from the tree and left. That's fine. You're buying time, holding your breath, watching, waiting for your man to show. I'm in the garden picking you a rose: this new strain with their frantic, crimson heads, open now and at their very best, having dozed all winter in a deep, rich bed, the trench I sank one evening by the potting shed. I mark the best bloom, take it at the neck.
I will bring you great harps in Heaven, Made of giant shells From the jasper sea. With a thousand burnt-up years behind, What then of the gulf from you to me? It will be but the width of a thread, Or the narrowest leaf of our sheltering tree. You dare not refuse my harps in Heaven. Or angels will mock you, and turn away. Or with angel wit, Will praise your eyes, And your pure Greek lips and bid you play, And sing of the love from them to you, And then of my poor flaming heart In the far-off earth, when the years were new. I will bring you such harps in Heaven That they will shake at your touch and breath, Whose threads are rainbows, Seventy times seven, Whose voice is life, and silence death.
Every time I play &ldquo;Them There Eyes&rdquo; I sing along, trailing a half-beat behind, as if holding the notes can bring my wife back. I got too much gin in me. Start up loud. Remembering the girl I met, married. The woman I lost. And Billie's voice outlines my desire. A wet wind off a mighty storm. The record spins, a relic. Like this drink. And the weather feels like the end of winter, full of promise. Not fair. When I met her she was this cute blonde. Curvy. At the USO. One of the nice girls. Nice to me. I never liked the &ldquo;songbirds,&rdquo; those slim blondes with high snappy voices. They could be sweet. But I was city-bred and full of blues. Shiny shoes on Saturday night. Before Uncle Sam sent me the letter that sent me to hell. Billie could go there. To hell, and come back laughing about it. So when I fell for her, I took her to see Billie. Wanted to find the edges to her curves, see if she could trace the fear rising within me. Would she know what Billie knew? I was a fool. She danced as if she had no spine. Spinning out the cracks between beats like the colored girls at the Savoy, though not as fast. Once I said to her, You must have some nigger blood in you. She laughed as if it didn't mean a thing.
 Small twilight singer Of dew and mist: thou ghost-gray, gossamer winger  Of dusk's dim glimmer, How cool thy note sounds; how thy wings of shimmer  Vibrate, soft-sighing, Meseems, for Summer that is dead or dying.  I stand and listen, And at thy song the garden-beds, that glisten  With rose and lily, Seem touched with sadness; and the tuberose chilly, Breathing around its cold and colorless breath, Fills the pale evening with wan hints of death.  I see thee quaintly Beneath the leaf; thy shell-shaped winglets faintly   As thin as spangle Of cobwebbed rain held up at airy angle;  I hear thy tinkle, Thy fairy notes, the silvery stillness sprinkle;  Investing wholly The moonlight with divinest melancholy:  Until, in seeming, I see the Spirit of the Summer dreaming Amid her ripened orchards, apple-strewn, Her great, grave eyes fixed on the harvest-moon.  As dewdrops beady, As mist minute, thy notes ring low and reedy:  The vaguest vapor Of melody, now near; now, like some taper  Of sound, far fading  Thou will-o'-wisp of music aye evading.  Among the bowers, The fog-washed stalks of Autumn's weeds and flowers,  By hill and hollow, I hear thy murmur and in vain I follow  Thou jack-o'-lantern voice, thou elfin cry, Thou dirge, that tellest Beauty she must die.  And when the frantic Wild winds of Autumn with the dead leaves antic;  And walnuts scatter The mire of lanes; and dropping acorns patter  In grove and forest, Like some frail grief, with the rude blast thou warrest,  Sending thy slender Far cry against the gale, that, rough, untender,  Untouched of sorrow, Sweeps thee aside, where, haply, I to-morrow Shall find thee lying, tiny, cold and crushed, Thy weak wings folded and thy music hushed.
O moon my mask, Clear in the nightwoods now you lie, Tilted upon your halved and garroted face. O moon my mask, Dealer of actions lewd and forced, Upon the unlettered waste, O moon, sweet task, white face, O white, O sweet, my oval glance, I turn, I turn, from your empowering glass. O now ... for whose engrossing force ... Although by pitchpine you are borne Or tusked by mountains you are flung, Your leafage, play, your stamps of intricacy, O moon, intemperate tenement, convict Like a clown's great gloves, the trademark For, or hairy maps and biscuits of Day's convert dragging us through pits. O moon, sweet angelology of fall, Your parts and terminals of light, Before you're out, must win, despite ... For in our sleep you breed our dreams for us Half children of your sensual tyranny, By whose Urania gods and cats In equal heat, conciliate your snows And we, by your sphered music, top White forms, fair senses, eastern genii that Launch summers just as soundlessly As all the engines of eternity. O nuptial drug and condiment of rite, O tempter to an inwardness of sight, Dwarfs, indigo, within whose opera, O bridal jest, you circummortal us, Nuptial of vacancy who wizards us. And all the fur of suns is not worth you Burning in empty hamlets our abstracts Whose shadows close behind us like a door.
Under the hive-like dome the stooping haunted readers Go up and down the alleys, tap the cells of knowledge   Honey and wax, the accumulation of years  Some on commission, some for the love of learning, Some because they have nothing better to do Or because they hope these walls of books will deaden  The drumming of the demon in their ears. Cranks, hacks, poverty-stricken scholars, In pince-nez, period hats or romantic beards  And cherishing their hobby or their doom Some are too much alive and some are asleep Hanging like bats in a world of inverted values, Folded up in themselves in a world which is safe and silent:  This is the British Museum Reading Room. Out on the steps in the sun the pigeons are courting, Puffing their ruffs and sweeping their tails or taking  A sun-bath at their ease And under the totem poles the ancient terror  Between the enormous fluted Ionic columns There seeps from heavily jowled or hawk-like foreign faces  The guttural sorrow the refugees.
Here I amafter seventy summers Here I amonly more so having given up gymnastics for crossword puzzles having forgotten many unforgettable things having survived sins suicides and bright ideas Here I amstill trying to digest the fruits of experience still letting my mind wander and lust still eating everything that will give me cancer Here I ama total failure at resisting temptation a confirmed osculation addict a surefire pushover for a beautiful shover Here I amonly more so wondering how to cohabit with the universe wondering how to become a mouthpiece for an angel wondering how to elect satyrs to the Senate Here I amwaiting for an appointment with my foregone conclusion expecting to be rowdy at my own funeral planning to pick out a snappy new incarnation Here I amin the meantime happy to bestow hooplas for the endearing craziness of fellow creatures for champagne sunrises and sexual satiety for the uncountable adventures possible during seventy summers Here I amstill being me only more so hoping to hoopla all the way to the mortuary
Yes, but we must be sure of verities such as proper heat and adequate form. That's what poets are for, is my theory. This then is a spring poem. A car warms its rusting hulk in a meadow; weeds slog up its flanks in martial weather. April or late March is our month. There is a fog of spunky mildew and sweaty tufts spill from the damp rump of a backseat. A spring thrusts one gleaming tip out, a brilliant tooth uncoiling from winter's tension, a ring of insects along, working out the Truth. Each year this car, melting around that spring, hears nails trench from boards and every squeak sing.
Tonight, watching the stars at the bow, my head draped over with giddy blood, body and boat drifting that other sky, I think of you suspended in the Chesapeake channel where wind frets and the seahawk blinks over cordgrass. You believed in the black eyes of love that wait beyond the deep rotting of the sea. I have ridden out in this ancestral scow to dream with you. Look at me staring off over the tide's dark as we pass through each humping swell. This is the ghost's road to Baltimore. The engines churn, the raked hull broods.
As I think of yellow,  a deep shining yellow that plunges down with white enfolding it, and as I think of a certain  stretch of roadway with a small river beside it in a stone-built channel, I see, quite clearly, a young girl  black-haired and quiet doing some household work, a couple of generations ago. Her face is broad, like a filbert,  the features small; I can see where the colours lie on her skin. I can see plainly, through the brown varnish  sentiment lays on the scene the fat lips and the inexpressive eyes. A dark body-scent disturbs the air  but not enough to persuade me that she and I might sympathize. She means so little to me, one way or the other  yet seems so real it's as if I had walked into somebody else's imagination. But whose? None of my friends', I think.  And what will come of it, what way shall I be involved? The wisest thing seems to be, by way of the road with the little river  and the deep shining yellow to retire discreetly, and leave the sulky bitch to it.
It sometimes happens that the woman you meet and fall in love with is of that strange Transylvanian people with an affinity for cats. You take her to a restaurant, say, or a show, on an ordinary date, being attracted by the glitter in her slitty eyes and her catlike walk, and afterwards of course you take her in your arms and she turns into a black panther and bites you to death. Or perhaps you are saved in the nick of time and she is tormented by the knowledge of her tendency: that she daren't hug a man unless she wants to risk clawing him up. This puts you both in a difficult position  panting lovers who are prevented from touching not by bars but by circumstance: you have terrible fights and say cruel things for having the hots does not give you a sweet temper. One night you are walking down a dark street and hear the pad-pad of a panther following you, but when you turn around there are only shadows, or perhaps one shadow too many. You approach, calling, &ldquo;Who's there?&rdquo; and it leaps on you. Luckily you have brought along your sword and you stab it to death. And before your eyes it turns into the woman you love, her breast impaled on your sword, her mouth dribbling blood saying she loved you but couldn't help her tendency. So death released her from the curse at last, and you knew from the angelic smile on her dead face that in spite of a life the devil owned, love had won, and heaven pardoned her.
I pick a daimen icker from the thrave And chew it thoughtfully. I must be brave And fight for this. My English colleagues frown But words come skelpin rank and file, and down They go, the kittle kimmers, they're well caught And I won't give them up. Who would have thought A gleg and gangrel Scot like me should barge, Or rather breenge, like a kelpie at large In the Cherwell, upon the very palladium Of anglophilia? My sleekit radium Is smuggled through the fluttering slips. My shed, My outhouse with its thousand-plus well-fed Pigeon-holes, has a northern exposure. Doon Gaed stumpie in the ink all afternoon, As Burns and I refreshed the dictionar With cantrips from his dancing Carrick star! O lovely words and lovely man! We'll caw Before us yowes tae knowes; we'll shaw the braw Auld baudrons by the ingle; we'll comb Quotations to bring the wild whaup safely home. Origin obscure? Origin uncertain? Origin unknown? I love those eldritch pliskies that are thrown At us from a too playful past, a store Of splore we should never be blate to semaphore! Oxford! here is a silent collieshangie To spike your index-cards and keep them tangy. Some, though not I, will jib at houghmagandy: We'll maybe not get that past Mrs Grundy.  But evening comes. To work, to work! To words! The bats are turning into bauckie-birds. The light in my scriptorium flickers gamely. Pioneers must never labour tamely. We steam along, we crawl, we pause, we hurtle, And stir this English porridge with a spurtle.
In the long summer light, before bed, when the rooks <> In a time of kitchen rituals, closing flowers And the putting away of childish things, Two old men sit down side by side, Benched with other, older justicers: Sibs and gossips who are weatherwise, Who know the worth and market price of things, Familiar with their worlds, flesh and devils. My grandfather adjusts his gold spectacles. He has made notes on the six o'clock news Which he reads carefully to the gardener, Halting his way through acres of grey water, Deserts and snows, distance upon distance, Where armies grope and falter, turned away From old red bricks, green lawns and hedges Soaked in a generous and golden light. The sofa-back is cool; I am in church, Idle at evening service, when large matters Are turned over in words black as this earth: Lincolnshire loam.
Here in the only Chinese restaurant for 150 miles all of us waiting for hamburgers listen to the latest on John Wayne's open heart. The one flag in this town always unfurling is the wave of yellow dust aging billboards into WANTED posters. Instahomes and trailers are flung across the spring prairies like a new deck of cheap cards that tatter at a touch and the whole town's one ongoing game. <> <> Each night stars range like headlights from a 3-D freeway in some lonesome cowboy's dream. Bedrooms glow blue till dawn. The newborn's heart can't beat, won't beat, holds its breath for a new start somewhere else. We listen to Paul Harvey gust through static as the only pair of goldfish in Wyoming, both male, circle their bright coffin sinking slowly toward the live Chop Suey at the bottom, wobbling back up like feeble dragon-kites. The hamburgers arrive. The fries are raw. We all wear one expression. The look of the traveler realizing suddenly he is on the wrong bus out of town and doesn't care.
One drinks paraquat. One drowns with bricks on. One skids on black ice. One is strangled with nylons. One is in hypothermia. One has thrombosis. A lion crunches one. A lover poisons one. One is shot at Entebbe. One meets a shark. One hangs from barbed wire. One is battered with hammers. One falls in a hopper. One jumps from a hotel. One is kicked by a horse. One has cancer many years. One burns at Brands Hatch. One chokes on a beef-ball. One lies paralysed in a house full of provisions. One plunges streaming in a Spitfire. One abandons hope in a bedsitter. One is sucked in quicksands. One slips in a quarry. Molten metal bites one. A mother aborts one. One fasts to death. One's parachute fails. One hang-glides into a hill. One is hanged. One is tortured with water. One is a shadow on a wall. One dies in orgasm. One is pegged on an anthill. A tractor mangles one. A tornado dashes one. One has the bends. One is beaten by guards. One has kidney failure. One suffocates in a cot. One is gored. One sniffs glue. One is crucified. One eats clockwork. One is beheaded. One is buried alive. One is frozen on fells. One is flayed. One is set in lava. One One
The rows. Remorse. The birthday guilt It seemed we'd always waited for. How quickly childhood makes itself The subject of all pain. At least Unhappiness was made to match. We can talk of the fear on the landing, Empty shops and lightless Sundays, Bare legs and cold knuckles. The voices Transmitted their coded distress From room to room, half-audibly. Conspirators in adult hurt, We were given an atlas to look at. The globe like a clockface described Its true circle and all the routes Guided us back to this room Where we share an impoverished tongue  What's wise, what's best, what shan't be thought By persons whose business is penance For lives that were never begun. This evening is an afterlife: Looking and carefully looking away We rehearse the responsible half-truths Like adults, with habits of fiction. The words will be all we can make, So that meaning deserts them, then self, Until only the voices are left For the listeners awake on the stairs, Who have learned to believe this is how These affairs are conducted, and think Of a day they will speak for themselves.
I shall not soon forget her and her eyes, The haunts of hate, where suffering seemed to write Its stealthy name, whose syllables are sighs,  In strange and starless night. I shall not soon forget her and her face, So quiet, yet uneasy as a dream That stands on tip-toe in a haunted place  And listens for a scream. She made me feel as one, alone, may feel In some grand, ghostly mansion of old time, The presence of a treasure, walls conceal,  And secret of a crime. With lambent faces, mimicking the moon,  The water lilies lie; Dotting the darkness of the long lagoon  As stars, the sky. A face, the whiteness of a water-flower,  With pollen-golden hair, In shadow half, half in the moonlight's glower,  Lifts slowly there. A young girl's face, death makes mute marble of,  Turned to the moon and me, Sad with the pathos of unspeakable love,  Floating to sea. One listening bent, in dread of something coming  He can not flee nor balk  A phantom footstep, in the ghostly gloaming,  That haunts a ruined walk. Long has he given his whole heart's hard endeavor  To labor, dark and dawn, Dreaming that Love still watched his toil and ever  Turned kindly eyes thereon. Now in his life, he feels, there nears an hour,  Inevitable, alas! When in the darkness he shall cringe and cower,  And see his dead self pass.
Safe journey Small book who in your maker grew gathering up what he knew when with alpine look he scanned from valley up past rock folds to notch the tally of skilled footholds Snow the peril snow dust mute still cold a white to hollow eyes in candid vertigo And on the peak in what was not in sight nor mind what heart had not forgot Then down down with care same as up no flight and in you with us to share a live silent light
Some mornings, if his breathing is light enough, if the lengthening light corresponds to the angle of his sleeping, I can see the face of his death just beneath the surface  narrowed, gaunt,  as my grandmother used to say  not five, anymore a blonde flame teased by bad dreams and night sweats, springing up, as if deer had lain on him for the whole of a night  rather, the resilience spent, his dying a kind of outage, the unpredictable power pole downed blocks away, the predestined rupture of a pipe below the street. In my office, on my desk, on page 53, in Berg's poem &ldquo;Page 256,&rdquo; Kafka says,  <> Meantime, my son yawns hugely, a kind of pull-chain he can reach that blocks the horns and sudden braking of traffic on the street, refuses to be tucked in completely, surrounds himself with rubber snakes, and boasts,  a moment of twisted bravado that makes perfect sense to me after a long day of being bossed around by superiors and clients, and so, when one hand creeps from the covers, and he says,  I hear dew inch down grass stems, the sirens twist like screws from green wood, and say,  <>
Cars pass him by; he'll never own one. Men won't believe in him for this. Let them come into the hills And meet him wandering a road, Fenced with rain, as I have now; The wind feathering his hair; The sky's ruins, gutted with fire Of the late sun, smouldering still. Nothing is his, neither the land Nor the land's flocks. Hired to live On hills too lonely, sharing his hearth With cats and hens, he has lost all Property but the grey ice Of a face splintered by life's stone.
Why did the woman want to kill one dog? Perhaps he was too lively, made her nervous, A vivid terrier, restless, always barking, And so unlike the gentle German shepherd. She did not know herself what demon seized her, How in the livid afternoon she was possessed, What strength she found to tie a heavy stone Around his neck and drown him in the horse-trough, Murder her dog. God knows what drove her to it, What strength she found to dig a shallow grave And bury him her own dog! in the garden. And all this while the gentle shepherd watched, Said nothing, anxious nose laid on his paws, Tail wagging dismal questions, watched her go Into the livid afternoon outside to tire The demon in her blood with wine and gossip. The gate clanged shut, and the good shepherd ran, Ran like a hunter to the quarry, hackles raised, Sniffed the loose earth on the haphazard grave, Pressing his eager nose into the dust, Sensed tremor there and (frantic now) dug fast, Dug in, dug in, all shivering and whining, Unearthed his buried friend, licked the dry nose Until a saving sneeze raised up the dead. Well, she had to come back sometime to face Whatever lay there waiting, worse than horror: Two wagging tails, four bright eyes shifting  Moment of truth, and there was no escape. She could face murder. Could she face redeeming? Was she relieved? Could she perhaps pretend It had not really happened after all? All that the village sees is that the dog Sits apart now, untouchable and sacred, Lazarus among dogs, whose loving eyes Follow her back and forth until she dies. She gives him tidbits. She can always try To make them both forget the murderous truth. But he knows and she knows that they are bound Together in guilt and mercy, world without end.
I wouldn't buy you from a car boot sale, not if your mind had been reduced to clear, though you were overpriced at half a year. With your significance cut down to scale I could afford you. If you soon turned stale I could point out that you were hardly dear and that I'd had my money's worth, or near. I wouldn't buy you from a car boot sale, you or a size five shoe or books in braille  I have no use for them. Let the sincere stall-holder smile and say  <> the greatest bargain in this hemisphere rather than just a load of useless gear. He might succeed with some. With me he'd fail. I wouldn't buy you from a car boot sale.
As if that hand squeezing crow's blood against a white sky beside an idiot's laughing face were real. Having set out in shoes that hurt by the bog road and missed the way. A cold day dragging to a cold end. The blood congealing black between the pleased fingers.
Though unseen Poets, many and many a time, Have answered me as if they knew my woe, And it might seem have fashioned so their rime To be my own soul's cry; easing the flow Of my dumb tears with language sweet as sobs, Yet are there days when all these hoards of thought Hold nothing for me. Not one verse that throbs Throbs with my heart, or as my brain is fraught. &lsquo;Tis then I voice mine own weird reveries: Low croonings of a motherless child, in gloom Singing his frightened self to sleep, are these. One night, if thou shouldst lie in this Sick Room, Dreading the Dark thou darest not illume, Listen; my voice may haply lend thee ease.
listen my children and you shall hear the true story of Mr Do -nothing the wellknown parvenu who (having dreamed of a corkscrew) studied with Freud a year or two and when Freud got through with Do- nothing Do -nothing could do nothing which you and i are accustomed to accomplish two or three times,and even a few more depending on the remu-  nerativeness of the stimulus(eheu fu -gaces Postu- me boo who)
The angels have somewhere fought and lost,  Fought and lost. All over the sky their wings are tossed And tattered and red with the life that has bled  Finally out of the host. The angels have everywhere fought and lost,  Fought and lost. Their debris is flotsam, and flung on the coast Of darkening night, and the quivering light  Departs without counting the cost. Never an angel will soar again  In the world without end, amen! Michael and Gabriel, all of them, slain, And the glowing throne of the Absolute One  Overset in disdain. There is no Great God in the innermost,  There is even no innermost. The angels are gone, all the heavenly host Is swept from out of the endless sky, The vastness is empty, except that there ply Worlds without end, without reason why  In spaces wide with mistrust. The vast great reaches between the suns  Are all unpeopled of God. Uninhabited space now runs In curls and flaps between worlds that plod Patiently round and round in ellipses Avoiding each other, yet incurring eclipses  And never yet known to nod. There is now no why, there is now no wherefore, You can't say: I am I, and therefore   Therefore nothing, and therefore nought. The battle that the angels fought Is lost entirely, you cannot fool us.  It was won by the one Almighty Nullus. <> <> Hail and be damned to thee, empty, most emptily, Nothing to sell in thee, nought to be bought, Gulping up science's smart Armada, Sipping to nothingness even thought, Soul and body, bone and blood Mind and spirit, bad and good Thou sips them up, and 'tis all the same, <> Hail and be damned to thee, winning the game!
Casually, along Morehampton Road, Where the secret of fertility Lay hidden all winter, green is about to explode And the yellow and pink fragility Of blossoms appears, like an episode On the stem of years. I stand a moment, under the globes of light By Sachs Hotel ... a twilight world Prepares itself, the world of Saturday night With its ritual mating dances On the threshing-floor of emotion, music and girls Inviting the lonely to take their chances Like mayflies blown on the winds Of circumstance. ... But not for an hour yet  An hour which comprehends The whole of winter, its studies and night sweat, Its loverless tedium, while the rain Beat on my lonely pane And I brewed coffee, and read Into the night.  I was no more dead Than a seed in the earth, just shrunken to a point And soaking up energies underground Like a million others. ... Spring comes around For the lucky, the disappointed, And girls with beautiful knees Sit out on the steps. A child of unreason In jacket and jeans, a man who gave up the ghost Of his worldly chances, the years I have lost Are coming into season, And I can see Inexorably ... another hour And girls will be in flower On endless dancefloors. Laughter and talk will be shallow Wherever I go, for tonight the dark powers Are taking new shapes, and wearing the pinks and yellows Of casual bedfellows.
I could have rested. Had I the wrong word, had I the courage to be gawky and awkward, I'd have breasted my shotgun pulses and spread my patchwork sail between her smile and the counter-image of her twining love for someone else's love. Had I been a coward, had I been even cold or just old and Paracelsus, I could have rested now. I would have sold and fled my treeless island youth and told her several birds ago before they nested in the south of my burning foolish mouth.
Alarm smites upon the covers, clenches the hands, Their own voices saying six o'clock have now turned tin, Have now turned back upon the night and cut within, And slippers and slid blankets without dawn the day begin. Ah, the striped flannel and the peach blossoms Arise into the day In disarray. Soap slips from them, though grimed or jellied, fresher, Steam roars in pipes if it is home this morning, Eyes lift and wake and lift, to mirror turning, Through mist of breath and hair tossed set to learning. Ah, the clean faces and the beards lost Waken to peer the day In glass display. The crisp and bitter warm them, cups their fingers, Breaking the fast of news and thought and telling How crust tastes, how France fares, how rails are selling, And by what means Moon Mullins is compelling. Ah, the white shirtsleeves and the shirtmaker Recall from far away Procedures of the day. Door sticks to take the key but is made fast. They are remembering the day and its content, And on the tracks and walks what way they went, And time and fortune, how firmly they are spent. Ah, the pressed suits, they waken on the day, In recalled array They have taken on the day.
watch out for falling feathers golden sailboats in the air watch out for falling feathers or they'll settle in your hair  and you'll look pretty silly with golden feathers  thrilling all over your nut  you'll never get a mentionable pensionable job  you'll live in a hut with a wooden water-butt  you'll have to sidle round the countryside side-ways  dancing to the music of bats  attempting to make a magical living  cutting rabbits in half producing girls out of hats o watch out for falling feathers golden rockinghorses in the air watch out for falling feathers or they'll settle in your hair  and you'll be no better than your singing  and no better than your audience too  and you'll be no better than feathers falling  golden golden down the blue  and you'll be no better than hedgehogs  who can only live like hedgehogs live  and you'll be no better than the holy Jumblies  who went to sea like you in a sieve yes watch out for falling feathers golden lions prowling down the air watch out for falling feathers or they'll settle in your hair  ten miles overhead there's a couple of angels  loving in a cloud on springs  and they got a little archangelic  and a couple of feathers jumped off of their wings  so live like a couple of featherheads  who got married on Uppendown Hill  for the feathers fell off a pair of angels  whose names coincidentally are Andy and Jill watch out for falling feathers golden cradles in the air watch out for falling feathers and catch them and save them and take them and place them golden in your children's hair watch out for falling feathers golden in the golden air watch out for falling feathers and they'll settle in your hair in your happyeverafter hair
Now instead of Amos &amp; Andy &ldquo;integration&rdquo; has given us The Skip &amp; Spike Show Straight out of Pandora's Box Buttermilk covered Flies Come from the busted nut of square darkness Famous germs explaining diseased jism from the inside
&ldquo;Andy&rdquo; is what the curator at the local Lawrence Museum called you, a work of art in miniature without a photo; she was too occupied to be wary of her impudence, and how could she know we had just left the blockprint memento of a pogrom, American fashion, to Quantrill's raiders, who had a list of 12 citizens of Kansas, and could find only bystanders, a squad of black recruits who could not hide near the river- grass, and so were butchered. Langston didn't look like that; &ldquo;Amos 'n' Andy&rdquo; were props for Simple at the barstool, and Grandma, the Reids, St. Luke's AME, the crafted homestead mortared in this segregated town, and you a screen apart in kindergarten. Letters to Mrs. Ames, mistress at Yaddo, apologize for the inconvenience of HUAC, which made its inquiries at Hadie's kitchenette, and you sought shelter at the racetrack, by watching grooms cool down Citation, and morning walks the prettiest in Saratoga, because those black girls earned their money riding bareback. The pomade which glossed your raven luxurious mop in early grades was shampooed in race rituals of the stage, and in your memoirs: what you hid from us was promise, rivers on the Solomon, settlements like Nicodemus, Kansas, with water of its own.
I was the dweller in the long cave Of darkness, lining it with the forms Of bulls. My hand matured early, But turned to violence: I was the man Watching later at the grim ford, Armed with resentment; the quick stream Remembers at sunset the raw crime. The deed pursued me; I was the king At the church keyhole, who saw death Loping towards me. From that same hour I fought for right, with the proud chiefs Setting my name to the broad treaties. I marched to Bosworth with the Welsh lords To victory, but regretted after The white house at the wood's heart. I was the stranger in the new town, Whose purse of tears was soon spent; I filled it with a solider coin At the dark sources. I stand now In the hard light of the brief day Without roots, but with many branches.
Annette came through the meadows Where daffodils did blow; A bonnie maid, a winsome maid, With hat all drooping low O'er eyes of wistful candor; Did ever timid swain Look in their depths, their liquid depths, And hope for peace again? 'Twas sunset on the meadows, And down the leafy lane, With tinkling, tinkling, mellow bells That made a soft refrain, The drowsy cows passed homeward; While in the orchard green, The robins trilled their gayest songs, All earth was glad, I ween. A youth came through the meadows, The squire's son was he; He saw the maiden's rosy blush, And thought none fair as she. &ldquo;Which way, O sweetest damsel, Go I to yonder town?&rdquo; Quoth he: She archly showed the path, With hat all drooping down. Beneath the broad brim gazed he  Into her shining eyes, Then with true grace said: &ldquo;Thanks, dear maid.&rdquo; And when the sunset skies  Grew dimmer, rode he forward,  Saying with gentle pain, &ldquo;Ah! what a bonnie, comely maid, I'll ride that way again.&rdquo; Annette came through the meadows,  No unaccustomed thing; And yet, and yet, what new, new song Was it her heart did sing? Was she the selfsame maiden?  Nay! not the one of yore, For in that heart a siren note  Will ring forevermore.
Here where nothing passes, Where centuries have stayed Alive under the grasses, Gently the heart is laid. Oh, breathe these meadows in Till you are filled with green, A drunkard of the scene Your dreams will wander in. Then set the eyes to graze, Set urban eyes to browse These rich, brief summer days Among the trees and cows. And sleep away all care, Lay rushing time to rest, And rise up light as air, Green-fed and meadow-blest.
Be true to what? The image, Right for its eminence, traces On the table-cloth a pattern, true No doubt to many places, Zero, the ubiquitous Everywhere-to-be-found answer. Here, where the image dives And twists like a drunken dancer, I lift the coffee to my lips, Running over the page with rhythms Everywhere-to-be-noted. That Does nothing to the people with whom  Just as casually as they I Operate: for the food is tender, Satisfactorily cooked and the eye, Everywhere-to-be-looking, will wander Invincibly from image to image. So this is poetry? The bland-eyed, obtrusive Airforce officer calmly Breathes the air, illusive, Everywhere-questioning, noticeable in Anger. It is as though these faces, Until now the still familiar human, Turned to stone or broke to pieces In his calm hands like bread. And questions Fall automatically from the position, Until then certain, of his lady's Light shoulders. Is this the condition, Capable in poetry, of all Rare beauties? O the blazing, Everywhere-to-be-met-with image is After all the point. To be choosing This, to be knowing it. That, Until we learn a better grace of faces, Remains our task not to be broken. For, Everywhere-turning, the image falls to pieces.
<> Reborn, with wings; who change, without ado, Your larval bodies to invade our skies, What Merlin magic disenchanted you, And made you beautiful for mortal eyes? Shuttles of summer, where the lilies sway Their languid leaves and sleepy pods and flowers, Weaving your colored threads into the day, Knitting with light the tapestry of hours, You come and go in needle-like array. Now on a blade of grass, or pod, as still As some thin shred of heaven, motionless, A point, an azure streak, you poise, until You seem a figment Summer would express But fails through utter indolence of will. Then suddenly, as if the air had news, And flashed intelligence of faery things, You vibrate into motion, instant hues, Searching the sunlight with diaphanous wings, Gathering together many filmy clues. Clues, that the subject mind, in part, divines, Invisible but evidenced through these:  The mote, that goldens down the sun's long lines, The web, that trails its silver to the breeze, And the slow musk some fragile flower untwines. Could we but follow! and the threads unwind, Haply through them again we might perceive That Land of Faery, youth left far behind, Lost in the wonder-world of Make-Believe, Where Childhood dwells and Happiness-of-Mind. And, undelayed, far, far beyond this field And quiet water, on the dream-road trail, Come on that realm of fancy, soul-concealed, Where we should find, as in the faery tale, The cap through which all Elfland is revealed.
Blue landing lights make nail holes in the dark. A fine snow falls. We sit on the tarmac taking on the mail, quick freight, trays of laboratory mice, coffee and Danish for the passengers. Wherever we're going is Monday morning. Wherever we're coming from is Mother's lap. On the cloud-pack above, strewn as loosely as parsnip or celery seeds, lie the souls of the unborn: my children's children's children and their father. We gather speed for the last run and lift off into the weather.
Sea-beast for sky-worshippers, the whale easily absorbs all others. Colours, languages, creatures, forms. Read the whale in all the ways clouds are read. The clouds out of sight are patterned and inscrutable; chaos from simple constituents, form out of simple chaos. A long-drawn complicity with us all in the sperm-whale's little eye; among its cells, somewhere, land-knowledge, the diverse, our condition. Decamped into boundless viscosity, our Absolute, the whale seems simpler than it is: as easy water-to-land knot in the museum sperm-whale's bared head-bone, alive as the megaliths are alive, all the force-lines crossing within their singular undemanding forms. Lifted from the whale-head, a disused quarry swims, borne on the earth; its cliffs a moon-cradle, its waters part of the sky.
<> Caress and confuse the thin-lipped bitter shacks Like Lady Bountiful bestowing dimpled alms  Her velvet skirt touching on trouble's tracks For a movie moment, then away, away! (The poor, poor, Pearly tears in the pale boudoir, and the pretty basket Left at the dirty door But only glycerine is pure, And later can send a gracious wreath for the casket ...) Here flowers torch the sky, and the bell-tolled sun Blazes the hills to exact and flawless glory; While the slums retreat to appropriate buff or dun; And Greco-limbed the starving migratory. Let the bough blight, the vulture fall on the kill, And want stand bold and bright, scream black and shrill.
What am I doing here, at this wayside station, alone, wrapped in wreaths of steam, wiping clean the carriage window (1940s THIRD CLASS) with a childhood sleeve? It's disturbing not knowing how I got here or where this is leading, or whether the scene is d&eacute;j&agrave; vu or a recurring dream. It's dark up ahead, with barriers or a crossing and a dog barking ... but the track behind leads back in time to where  struggling in the distance to make themselves known. I remember, on the way here, admiring the ruins, and the hayfields, and people being baptized in a stream where children caught silver minnows but it all seems dated, a lifetime ago or longer even. (These fittings are Edwardian with button-seats, brass lamps, and posters of Baden-Baden and Lake Como.) Now there's this dim-lit provincial platform at the end of the century, with its border posts, as the train lurches forward and guards demand papers, crossing my name off as they slide back the door.
<>  And glimmer and shower their balm And bloom on the tropical ocean,  That crystals round islands of palm: And she sang to and beckoned and bound me  With beauty immortal and calm. She was wild as the spirits that banner,  Auroral, the ends of the Earth, With polar processions, that battle  With Darkness; or, breathing, give birth To Silence; and herd from the mountains  The icebergs, gigantic of girth. She was silver as sylphids who blend with  The morning the pearl of their cheeks: And rosy as spirits whose tresses  Trail golden the sunset with streaks: An opaline presence that beckoned  And spake as the sea-rapture speaks:  &ldquo;Come with me! come down in the ocean!   Yea, leave this dark region with me!  Come! leave it! forget it in thunder  And roll of the infinite sea! Come with me! No mortal bliss equals  The bliss I shall give unto thee.&rdquo; ... And so it was then that she bound me  With witchcraft no mortal divines, While softly with kisses she drew me,  As the moon draws a dream from the pines, Down, down to her cavern of coral,  Where ever the sea-serpent twines. And ever the creatures, whose shadows  Bulk huge as an isle on the sight, Swim cloud-like and vast, without number,  Around her who leans, like a light, And smiles at me sleeping, pale-sleeping,  Wrapped deep in her mermaiden might.
<> And seen for us the devastating light Whereof there is not either day or night, And shared with us the glamour of the Word That fell once upon Amos to record For men at ease in Zion, when the sight Of ills obscured aggrieved him and the might Of Hamath was a warning of the Lord. Assured somehow that he would make us wise, Our pleasure was to wait; and our surprise Was hard when we confessed the dry return Of his regret. For we were still to learn That earth has not a school where we may go For wisdom, or for more than we may know.
Our clothes are still wet from wading The Chickamauga last evening. There is heavy frost. We have Walked on the dead all night. Now in the firelight We are exchanging shells and grape shot. I can still hear our loud huzza When late in the day The enemy fell into full retreat Along the pine ridge to the East ... We chased them until we were weary. Each night this week There's been something To keep me from sleep. Just an hour ago I saw A dead sharp-shooter sitting Against a rock with a scallop Of biscuit still lodged in his mouth. He wore one silk sock. Snediker has returned from Chattanooga With five thousand convalescents For the left wing of their musketry. We have roasted a deer With a molasses sauce and pepper. Magrill and Zandt have returned From horse hunting with a sack of sugar. By morning we will have buried our dead And fed the prisoners: Joe Cotton Will hang all seven of them in one tree When he sees they're done Licking their fingers ... I shot a Rebel yesterday In high water just for cursing me. Just six months ago For that alone it would have meant Three days in stockade. We can see now that cannonading Has set the hillside on fire. The wounded Grays Will be burned Beyond their Christian names ... Joe Cotton says he'd ask God For rain, but he's got no tent And river water Has chilled him straight through To the very quick of his being.
Dan, who adorn richly like duchesses ladies with sleek furs in our northern snows  the seal sadly that lay blotted on the floes, the mink that darted in the leafless trees: yet are not strong and murdered coats like these fitter for males, that have been the clothes of shepherds and woodsmen and made grandiose the stature of kings during solemnities? Then as I see on our not unvivid street spare men among the falling flakes flit by, I think, Let Dan resume to glorify our knights with furs and make my city proud like seaports whither came the Hansa fleet, Hamburg, Luebeck, and Nijni-Novgorod.
Clams and barnacles clatter black and white in the first feet of a new tide. By old piles perch gleam, slide by flexing men o'war. Bathers urge the summer to their skins and water climbs in air to hurt their eyes. Gulls echo in two-note screams to the south of pioneering winds, the moment a ferry spawns waste. Where whites first landed is forgotten. Spray, abandoned, falls from the statue by the marked-off, unused picnic grounds. A love begins: a beer can, tossed, stops rolling where the waves can barely reach. And a love is ended or it never started: one man, his coat too dark for the day, where waves will never reach, remembers what descended where the bubbles are.
Mother and listener she is, but she does not listen. I look at her profile as I ask, the sweet blue-grey of eye going obdurate to my youth as I ask the first grown sexual question.She cannot reply. And from then on even past her death, I cannot fully have language with my mother, not as daughter and mother through all the maze and silences of all the turnings. Until my own child grows and asks, and until I discover what appalled my mother long before, discover who never delivered her, until their double weakness and strength in myself rouse and deliver me from that refusal. I threw myself down on the pine-needle evening. Although that old ancient poem never did come to me, not from you, mother, although in answer you did only panic, you did only grieve, and I went silent alone, my cheek to the red pine-needle earth, and although it has taken me all these years and sunsets to come to you, past the dying, I know, I come with my word alive.
Outside, it's any tenement on East Tenth Street; at the head of the stairs I drop my watch, keys, wallet into a slender metal box and take a robe of thin cotton sheeting. Past the case of smoked fish, I pull off my clothes among napping strangers and descend marble steps stained with a century's grit. In the steam room, an old woman looks up; slender gourds hang off the cage of her ribs, and when she wrings the pink cloth on her crotch, I see a bun, bald as a girl's, and think  ashamed. She runs weary eyes down my form, then closes them. Along the plunge pool, supple women stroke green mud on their cheekbones and stretch their legs between plastic palms. Above them, a compote of brilliant tile fruit and the name of an Italian mason. I love to think of him telling his son about this place, or how it was in the thirties, filled with immigrants from cold-water flats, one of them with eyes like Franz Kafka could not afford to come here, but did, breathing steam for hours, not needing to remember the names of things, only sweating out the soot of New York, safe as I feel in the hot cave where women drape between streaming spigots. Some murmur, most are silent, except when one grabs a bucket and dumps it onto her chest with a groan. Our eyes meet and we grin, grateful to show and view the real shapes of ourselves: so many different breasts and hips that get smoothed over by clothes, none of us looking like we're supposed to! And after, our hair wrapped up in towels, we climb to a roof that faces the back of Ninth Street where strangers pass by lit windows, cooking dinner, opening letters. We stretch out there on cots, and beside me tears slide like sweat into the turban of a stunning young woman. Whatever the reason, I feel bound to her weeping, eyes locked on our city's sky aglow with all that lies beneath it.
Night and rain a silver grating on the night; Rain, and the wet leaves sobbing beneath my feet; The small inn waits across the sodden leaves, Silence at its doors and darkness in the eaves. The iron lanterns, aureoled with light, Smear the wet pavements with gold and the wet street With silver: you would say that fold on fold Night was being unravelled into gold. Midnight, deadened like repeated rhyme, Sounds from the old North ... I were best in bed. It's a cold drizzle ... and the soundless dead Go groping past and melt into the inn. Here comes the fops and gallants of old time In the great morning of the Rights of Man, Black redingotes and white curled collars to the chin, The bronze hair tossed in a style republican, Or in the manner of the Corporal Who fed men's hearts with fire from Italy, Stringy and black, smeared with  To lie like a spaniel's ears along the cheek. Huge shadows wavered over the rough wall; Rich firelight swam into the wine to die; With snaps of silver the glasses shone and touched, Freedom was thundered, lyric passion smutched. Here I should have come under a black cape, A gold silk waistcoat winking in the folds, And slipping into the quietest of seats Unpocketed in boards of drab John Keats. Then, letting the black edge of my mantle drape Over one arm while silver tapped with snuff  Crumpling my brows as when a grandan scolds, Read silently each page and sneezed, &ldquo;What stuff!&rdquo; Oh, they were brave lads and they bravely dreamed,  What matter if they drank and gamed and died? They dared to dream that man might still be free, And pledged in bitter claret Liberty. And me on whom that heavenly dawn has gleamed As sunset only me they hail in pride, Brother, whenever the rain's slow parallels meet In shining pallors through the shadowy street.
The lights come up, the stage is bare, the audience goes on sitting there, row upon row of gleaming teeth, set in expressions of dutiful mirth for something they have long since forgotten. Someone has spilled an ice-cream cone from the Balcony onto someone's head. It trickles down over his forehead and from there down into his lap. We see the smile fade from his lips, the lips fade from his mouth, the mouth slowly wither from his teeth. Now his jaw drops open on its tendons and a look of horrified understanding dawns. The urge to clap is irresistible. He finds this is no longer possible.
I know him well; and speak as one who knows. Imagine, then, dear darkened-corner-squatting Ape, O lifter-of-a-limp-finger-to-furrowed-nose, Imagine the intemperate scene, and gape. And first, his humble chasm, and then the day That stands straight up in parallels to the sky without Refining shadow or decay, and then the sudden play Of immense night that whiplike thrashes mountains about, And these that vaguely crouch like beasts around The abyss, their fallen prey. There he sits Before a dressing table, ageless, alone, without a sound, And mouths into a mirror where his image flits. But he perseveres among infinities, with whitened wig And penciled brows; and he can improvise most wittily, Whatever the lines. Yet time and again, like a moving twig, He sighs, sighs, sighs extravagantly. Today he is to be Voltaire, but they will not cue, Or if they call he will not hear; and the mirror trembles like a veil And the mountains creep near. And then he says like you, Imagine it! he
Heaven shall forgive you Bridge at dawn, The clothes you wear or do not wear  And Ladies' Leap-frog on the lawn And dyes and drugs and  Your vicious things shall melt in air ... ... But for the Virtuous Things you do, The Righteous Work, the Public Care, It shall not be forgiven you. Because you could not even yawn When your Committees would prepare To have the teeth of paupers drawn Or strip the slums of Human Hair; Because a Doctor Otto Maehr Spoke of &ldquo;a segregated few&rdquo;  And you sat smiling in your chair  It shall not be forgiven you. Though your sins cried to Father Vaughan, These desperate you could not spare Who steal, with nothing left to pawn; You caged a man up like a bear For ever in a jailer's care Because his sins were more than  ... I know a house in Hoxton where It shall not be forgiven you. Princess, you trapped a guileless Mayor To meet some people that you knew ... When the last trumpet rends the air It shall not be forgiven you.
I went out to the hazel wood, Because a fire was in my head, And cut and peeled a hazel wand, And hooked a berry to a thread; And when white moths were on the wing, And moth-like stars were flickering out, I dropped the berry in a stream And caught a little silver trout. When I had laid it on the floor I went to blow the fire aflame, But something rustled on the floor, And some one called me by my name: It had become a glimmering girl With apple blossom in her hair Who called me by my name and ran And faded through the brightening air. Though I am old with wandering Through hollow lands and hilly lands, I will find out where she has gone, And kiss her lips and take her hands; And walk among long dappled grass, And pluck till time and times are done The silver apples of the moon, The golden apples of the sun.
The woodpecker goes beating a little drum. The shadow of the hyena blackens my face. In my legs which are to be judged harshly, And my hands with their false fury, The bones lull each other tenderly. I am with all that shivers, All that hangs limp and without life. It rains toads. My blood runs Past dark inner cities on fire. I climb into deep wells, Rock bottoms and bone bottoms Where gall of my birth steams. Things slip out of my grasp, Other things come to a quiet end. This is my song. Nothing of us remains. Almost nothing. I am whatever beast inhabits me. When the rain turns into snow Every beast shall see its track and wonder.
Wondered would we ever surface. &ldquo;Not yet,&rdquo; the conductor yelled at every stop. Wondered was it even a train we were on, if it was was it going the right way. Dreamt it was a plane we were on, as if it was an in-flight movie ... On the screen two pairs of lips met, some incumbent taste caught in their mouths for years finally kissed away, a way of holding the world at bay, out of reach, not to know what they'd missed when it was gone ... Likewise we the collective kiss we called Ouadada. Leapt across unwon space, pure caprice He who'd have said we so assured it was a plain we were on, flat for as far as the eye could see around him, Raz with an  end. A way of spelling, a spell if by  exit, trackless the train we rode, so abruptly conductorless, riderless, ghost of what it was,an awayness receding as fast as he approached, gone could he have gotten there ... Into the shed, might wood be water, sophic skirt with him under it as if it was a tent, pitched as would a note be, only were wood water, rasp our lone resort
Lamplight yellows where the gray is seeping in. From the hill five muddled bell tones slide through tireless rain, one by one, up and down the streets of the neighborhood. A while ago there was a single half-hearted, unmusical mumble of kettledrum that scudded and built to a rousing conclusion, left me wondering whether you  Yes. I could almost see you hearing it: rising near but never breaking the surface of a calm sleep, you'd have scowled, gone rigid, caught your breath and, raising one knee, turned a statue of yourself to rest on its side. Then, again, the measured rise and fall, rain at your window unfocusing the last, the first few lights in town.
Night-riders gather, and all skies look east. The stars are steady in their tight formations, Crossing with light this grind of troubled air. The house is softening its velvet textures, Buoyed to its moorings by a bombers' moon. Its charts record only the stretch of wood Which gives, misgives, at the sleepwalker's touch, And stranger-faces turn from watery mirrors. Outside, the beaten grass is lost and grey Where levelled meadows launch their thunders out, Over the shining waters into Europe. The house is dreaming little flocks of questions: Fidgets of dark glass tripping in the frame, Easings of tread and riser at the stair. The cows at dusk spoke only country matters As daylight sank behind the window-bars, And no pathfinder drops his marker-flares Upon this crouching city of bad dreams. Over the leaded grate, farmer and dog Exchange their painted sentiments of loss As the old home comes underneath the hammer. The night dies on till all the tides are turned, And though the ebb was deeper than the full, From this, our common ground, we cannot single That diminution in the homing waves Which speaks of tears, which speaks of tears and flame.
Unless you have slept with a lesbian whose wine-darkened ambivalence was your only hope Unless you have shaved the beard from your face Unless you have had lotion applied to your face and hands and mousse palmed into your hair Unless you have waited an eternity while she chose appropriate music Unless you have lain sleepless all night in that music smelling the cum she did not want in her body Unless your touch has caused a wince of annoyance and regret Unless you have dressed last and wordlessly to sounds of sheets being changed Unless you have embraced the morning fog only to have it turn to rain Unless you have driven home following the same powder blue Ford you've followed all your life Unless you've seen the turtle dragging itself across the road encased in what it yearns for Unless you've knelt by the snakeskin abandoned to rain inside out Unless you have heard the wasps driven mad by rain flinging themselves against the closed windows of your house you merely know what love is like
<>  Would his vision have yielded When he found what will never again  From his vision be shielded,  Though he paid with as much of his life  As a nun could have given, And to-night would have been as a knife,  Devil-drawn, devil-driven. For to-night, with his flame-weary eyes  On the work he is doing, He considers the tinder that flies  And the quick flame pursuing. In the leaves that are crinkled and curled  Are his ashes of glory, And what once were an end of the world  Is an end of a story. But he smiles, for no more shall his days  Be a toil and a calling For a way to make others to gaze  On God's face without falling. He has come to the end of his words,  And alone he rejoices In the choiring that silence affords  Of ineffable voices. To a realm that his words may not reach  He may lead none to find him; An adept, and with nothing to teach,  He leaves nothing behind him. For the rest, he will have his release,  And his embers, attended By the large and unclamoring peace  Of a dream that is ended.
The poem was entitled &lsquo;The Streets of Hanoi&rsquo;, It told of falling bombs and death and destruction And misery and pain and wastage. The poem was set to music, which told of death And destruction and misery and pain and wastage. A hall was found to play it in, a singer to sing it, An orchestra to accompany the singer, and a printer To print the programme ... Whereupon it was felt (Things being what they happened to be) that The song had better be called &lsquo;The Streets of Saigon&rsquo;. It was well sung, well played, and well received. Truly poetry is international, just like music, And falling bombs and death and destruction And misery and pain and wastage, Truly we only need one poet in the world Since local references can be inserted by editors, Theatre managers or clerks in the Culture Ministries.
Walk with me, Sir, when nothing perpends The wilderness within me. When I adhere To the trumped up altar because I fear An obscure answer, see that your ghost attends Me, for what reason? Knowing I do not deserve Vision or vigil of your serpent spirit Untwined from knowledge to make me that visit, Nevertheless I entreat. I serve Much the same master. Was your good a god? I hate my ruler because he will not break me Under the overloving justice of his rod, Thus but for love I hate him. Take me To that inverted golgotha you trod And, O Sir, show me the mirror that will break me!
<> In a circle sober-eyed and condolent, With foreheads drawn, with gargoyle shoulders bent In sibilant prayer. They broke the mouldy bread Of pious awe and reverential dread To feed the journey where he should be sent (For each and all the sacred sacrament) And drew the coverlet about his head. For they had known too well his way of life To miss at last the meaning of his death; They thought to find him broken on the tree, See cold go through him like a poisoned knife: They thought the foul fiend rode upon the breath Of his last gasp: &ldquo;Lama sabachthani!&rdquo;
These men I meet in my day (call it that)  Would you illuminate, transcend, find best? They'd start on you hunchback unholy coat and porkpie hat, then cast you &ldquo;straightway down into the lower domains of pettiness,&rdquo; ignore you like an Indian. But we, you and me, we could walk along old railroad tracks, no trains, and I could show Sherwood Anderson's grief, grim warehouses, defeated fields, crucifixion poles in dark wind, and you could share out of that bundle on your back a few of those bones.
Unaccustomed to rain, hills, trees overhead gentle as a lover's hands, I pass the student center, where medievalists crowd the cash bar, pause on the steep path to the dorm, remove my shoes and am carried for a time on waters deep as liturgy, rain sifting through trees like unexplained tears. Compline has ended: Cistercians observing Bernard of Clairvaux's nine-hundredth year sang the &ldquo;Salve Regina&rdquo; to a perfect, oceanic stillness. Six-foot-two and built like a barrel, the hem of his habit rolling like waves onto shore, my unlikely fairy godmother bade me sing. &ldquo;This is not a spectator sport,&rdquo; he boomed, inviting me to learn the chant. And as I joined the others on the wild green ride our song became conveyance, a glorious means of passage along a narrow road. &ldquo;Can you help me?&rdquo; asks a monk at the door. Midnight strikes as we move a table into place for morning Mass. I'll be gone by then, on a flight to the known world, back through two time zones, my shoes still soggy, to my drought-stricken plain; back to my life, the man I love. I will find it changed, a dusty old house where doors no longer fit their frames.
We saw Frank Stella in wet snow and cold, moving down the street in a giant mass, you with your private giggling and snowballs, he with his premature size and hormones. Up against the wall in the museum, he almost touched a spike projected by Stella, a small tower bursting from the painting; I whispered, &ldquo;We cannot press flesh to the priceless.&rdquo; To the pizza parlor on Seventh Avenue, he looked for puddles to wet his feet, an old habit from a previous life where he was a missionary in a tropical rain forest, or a seaman. Riding to Chinatown, the faces hovering in lit signs grabbed for our eyes.
Once, I'd only heard of a Chinese fancy-dish of fish that rots till it comes alive and a maggot-spaghetti squirms where once a mackerel gasped for worms: cannibal devouring smaller cannibal till only two equal giants are left to struggle, entwined, like wrestlers on a cliff: and at last only One omnipotent maggot-ceasar who rent his rival and lived  of all the mob and the triumvirate, his fat and lonely body stiff and blind with meat, his wrings without a wriggle  for a slit-eyed Chinaman to pluck and serve on a not-too-clean willow-pattern plate to a lean and curious tourist.
who's most afraid of death?thou art of him utterly afraid,i love of thee (beloved)this and truly i would be near when his scythe takes crisply the whim of thy smoothness.and mark the fainting murdered petals.with the caving stem. But of all most would i be one of them round the hurt heart which do so frailly cling....) i who am but imperfect in my fear Or with thy mind against my mind,to hear nearing our hearts' irrevocable play  through the mysterious high futile day an enormous stride (and drawing thy mouth toward my mouth,steer our lost bodies carefully downward)
In valleys of springs of rivers,  By Ony and Teme and Clun, The country for easy livers,  The quietest under the sun, We still had sorrows to lighten,  One could not be always glad, And lads knew trouble at Knighton  When I was a Knighton lad. By bridges that Thames runs under,  In London, the town built ill, 'Tis sure small matter for wonder  If sorrow is with one still. And if as a lad grows older  The troubles he bears are more, He carries his griefs on a shoulder  That handselled them long before. Where shall one halt to deliver  This luggage I'd lief set down? Not Thames, not Teme is the river,  Nor London nor Knighton the town: 'Tis a long way further than Knighton,  A quieter place than Clun, Where doomsday may thunder and lighten  And little 'twill matter to one.
Young men go walking in the woods, Hunting for the great ornament, The pediment of appearance. They hunt for a form which by its form alone, Without diamond blazons or flashing or Chains of circumstance, By its form alone, by being right, By being high, is the stone For which they are looking: The savage transparence. They go crying The world is myself, life is myself, Breathing as if they breathed themselves, Full of their ugly lord, Speaking the phrases that follow the sight Of this essential ornament In the woods, in this full-blown May, The months of understanding. The pediment Lifts up its heavy scowl before them.
how it hurts a whole country arrested by progress, the gleaming manacles of modern transnational management mangling and mutilating the wrists of a youthful labor force in the airport a sign, a slogan the words &ldquo;economic revolution&rdquo; originally writ large in red, now nigh invisible, are fading away c'est la vie, revolutions are never easy never negotiated nor agreed with handshake and signature more often it is a bullet which reorders the wealth and the severed hands of traitorous thieves cut off that seals the success of struggle
There dwells a wife by the Northern Gate,  And a wealthy wife is she; She breeds a breed of roving men  And casts them over sea. And some are drowned in deep water,  And some in sight o' shore, And word goes back to the weary wife  And ever she sends more. For since that wife had gate or gear,  Or hearth or garth  She willed her sons to the white harvest,  And that is a bitter yield. She wills her sons to the wet ploughing,  To ride the horse of tree  And syne   Far-spent from out the sea. The good wife's sons come home again  With little into their hands, But the lore of men that have dealt with men  In the new and naked lands; But the faith of men that have brothered men  By more than easy breath, And the eyes of men that have read with men  In the open books of Death. Rich are they, rich in wonders seen,  But poor in the goods of men; So what they have got by the skin of their teeth  They sell for their teeth again. And whether they lose to the naked life  Or win to their hearts' desire, They tell it all to the weary wife  That nods beside the fire. Her hearth is wide to every wind  That makes the white ash spin; And tide and tide and 'tween the tides  Her sons go out and in; (Out with great mirth that do desire  Hazard of trackless ways  In with content to wait their watch  And warm before the blaze); And some return by failing light,  And some in waking dream, For she hears the heels of the dripping ghosts  That ride the rough roof-beam. Home, they come home from all the ports,  The living and the dead; The good wife's sons come home again  For her blessing on their head!
Hieroglyphics of the mace, the posture of the faculty, pose of building and trustee, janitors come and gone: the service industry of the deep night now gatekeepers of deep mines, facile libraries, a prominent Abraham Lincoln, apt phrasing, personal losses, his mad midwifery of the nation's cylindrical wounds of the black feminine persona, a mindset of Sojourner Truth. She is suspicious of speech on the run, the pastel banners crisscrossed in the oleander lights of the public square, the flexible fire escape. The human rite in secret blood and sinew, the science of defensive starting phrasing, the idol labs, their great dorsal fins of circuitry blooming everywhere, the not so pure products of America needs a balancing act on the wintry trapeze, bigger than Chaplin, more special than wavering tongues and herringbone, the necklace of divinity: we sit down on our prayer rugs and ubiquitous tea, in the fuse and muster of the constable for her heart listens all your life: she does not sleep on the expedient wishes of the few, remembering the child alive in the man, kissing the direct, crucible in the ark; this revolutionary garden.
Dashing in glass we race, New York to Washington: encased with bubbles lie in emerald spa: upholstered promenades convey us far. Have we reached the last limits? What have we not done? Shut into velvet we survey the scene, the locked-up building, the frozen pier: before and before the events, we loved our minds in fear: they wriggle into worms. We watch.We turn.Surrounded, we are at last closed in. Coated in learning, do we cause its crown to fall? the plane, the bath, the car extend our protection: (But have we seen it all? Shall we continue in this direction?:) This is not the way to save the day. Get up and dress and go go nobly to and fro: Dashing in glass we race, New York to Mexico . . . .
When the night winds whistle through the trees and blow the crisp brown leaves a-crackling down, When the autumn moon is big and yellow-orange and round, When old Jack Frost is sparkling on the ground, It's Thanksgiving time! When the pantry jars are full of mince-meat and the shelves are laden with sweet spices for a cake, When the butcher man sends up a turkey nice and fat to bake, When the stores are crammed with everything ingenious cooks can make, It's Thanksgiving time! When the gales of coming winter outside your window howl, When the air is sharp and cheery so it drives away your scowl, When one's appetite craves turkey and will have no other fowl, It's Thanksgiving time!
According to Brueghel when Icarus fell it was spring a farmer was ploughing his field the whole pageantry of the year was awake tingling near the edge of the sea concerned with itself sweating in the sun that melted the wings' wax unsignificantly off the coast there was a splash quite unnoticed this was Icarus drowning
<> Time drops to the ground like a shadow from a tree under which we lie in a wood boat built from it by an unknown carpenter beyond the sea upon which peach pits float fired by a gunner who has run out of ammunition for a cannon whose muzzle bites heartshaped holes out of the horizon of our flesh stunned in sun and baffled into silence between the act of sex and the act of poetry blissed-out in the darkening air at the moment of loving and coming there is no glimpsing of the misery of the world
<> Forgive him his evasive moods and cold; The absence that belied him oft of old, The war upon sad speech, the desperate jest, And pity's wildest gush but half-confessed, Forgive him! Let your gentle memories hold Some written word once tender and once bold, Or service done shamefacedly at best, Whereby to judge him. All his days he spent, Like one who with an angel wrestled well, O'ermastering Love with show of light disdain; And whatsoe'er your spirits underwent, He, wounded for you, worked no miracle To make his heart's allegiance wholly plain.
My missing teeth ache the most, they are the majority. My dead friends do me the worst distress. Hope, that future vacuum, I abhor, oh more than thirty feet!  nor has the real, but, been a bed of roses. Where, God, are these thoughts tending I think aloud for whom? You who have been absent, it wasn't I that turned my face away. Here am I! though I say it grudgingly and late. &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; agrees my Lord, &ldquo;grudgingly and late.&rdquo;
Over the hills the loud sun rolls in the falling sky, Flames and goes down; In the wide and cloudless evenings the night comes slipping out of the east, The sun goes down with a drop and a rushing and no paint left on the west. On moonless nights small boys in their beds hearken for train-sound And hearing the far intolerable whistling stir wanly, Having over their breasts the feeling of weeping That lies like the touch of a hand. They listen at night and the sound finds them. It is here in these new-broken places One looking west in the late dusk Thinks of the wind and remembers; Looks east to the ridges, naked and lifted, Looks over the gaunt fields, thinks of the wind, Remembers the earth ancient and hoary: new-broken, new-seeded. It is here with no human past to tone it The desolate wilderness of the earth bleeds from the furrow To color the air till the thick-planted orchards smother it under And houses soak it and it loses the smell as a buck's hide loses the stench with the years. Then in that time a man may wander the dark Not stopped by the wind, not saddened by nostalgia for times past, Things gone, something no longer near, the thick sound of people. Then will be girls laughing and the lights close. What signs can you hold to in choosing a country but earth and the sky? What ways can you tell it but work there and sweat there and learn it by living? You can tell by the shine of the rising sun whether or not it is your country  By the taste of the air, by the feel of the loam  You can tell by the color of the shining wind Whether or not it is your country. We have the new earth; We walk on a ground that remembers the grass, and dung of the deer, the camps of the moving tribes. There are in this place no songs remotely sprung from the grief of an ancient brooding. Only the talk of the old men recalling the way a man walked, or a horse sprang, or the young squaws naked at dusk. We walk on the wide fields burdened with light And the past there thin at our heels. We walk the young earth, And out of it rises the whisper, the inscrutable mood; It comes to the throat in a lift and an eddy. We walk the young earth and the thin stars moving, The deep root feeding, The far trains haunting the night.
You show me two faces, that of a flower opening and of a fist contracting like the gripping of ice. You speak to me with two voices, one thundering on the ear's drum, the other one mistakeable for silence. Father, I said, domesticating an enigma; and as though to humour me you came. But there are precipices within you. Mild and dire, now and absent, like us but wholly other which side of you am I to believe?
Theirs though there we were, whereabouts not known, new ground undone.Blue match blown out,blue breath to the kindling of marrow,memory,blood ... Bluelimbed leaper.Feathered stretch. Dirty sock slipped under caesar's door ... Come at last in light of impending collapse to speak of soul, shot splendor talked about so convincingly we winced,chickens beat their wings as we walked in ... Raw skin, legs dusty with legdust,tautologic drift, otherwise untouched ... Out on the balcony, the bazaar less than a stone's throw away,algarab&oacute;a buzzed,bit me,took my tongue
What you may cluster &lsquo;round the knees of space We hold in vision only, asking trace Of districts where cliff, sea and palm advance The falling wonder of a rainbow's trance. Your light lifts whiteness into virgin azure ... Disclose your lips, O Sun, nor long demure With snore of thunder, crowding us to bleed The green pre&euml;mption of the deep seaweed. You, the rum-giver to that slide-by-night , The moon's best lover, guide us by a sleight Of quarts to faithfuls surely smuggled home  As you raise temples fresh from basking foam. Expose vaunted validities that yawn Past pleasantries ... Assert the ripened dawn As you have yielded balcony and room Or tempests in a silver, floating plume. Wrap us and lift us; drop us then, returned Like water, undestroyed, like mist, unburned ... But do not claim a friend like him again, Whose arrow must have pierced you beyond pain.
Was it when Kriemhild was queen  That we rode by ways forgotten Through the Rhineland, dimly seen  'Neath a low moon white as cotton? I, a knight? or troubadour? Thou, a princess? or a poor  Damsel of the Royal Closes?  For, I met thee somewhere sure! ...  Was it 'mid Kriemhilda's roses? Or in Venice, by the sea?   What romance grew up between us? Thou, a doge's daughter? She,  Titian painted once as Venus?  I, a gondolier whose barque Glided past thy palace dark?   Near St. Mark's? or Casa d'Oro?  From thy casement didst thou hark  To my barcarolle's &ldquo; Klaia wast, of Egypt: yea,  Languid as its sacred lily. Didst with me a year and day  Love upon the Isle of Phil&aelig;? I, a priest of Isis? Sweet, 'Neath the date-palms did we meet  By a temple's pillared marble? While, from its star-still retreat,  Sank the nightingale's wild warble? Have I dreamed that I, thy slave,  From thy lattice, my sultana, Beckoning, thy white hand did wave,  Dropped me once a rose? sweet manna Of thy kiss warm in its heart? That, through my Chald&aelig;an art,  With thy Khalif's bags of treasure, From Damascus we did start,  Fled to some far land of pleasure? Was I one? another thou?   Let it be. What of it, dearest?  Haply 'tis the memory now  Of these passions dead thou fearest?  Nay! those loves are portions of, Evolutions of this love,  Present love, where thou appearest To combine them all and prove.
The waves of the sea Flood up the staggered shore, Pour along fanned-in runnels, Slap splashily on flabby jetties; At the prod of the equinox They clamber over parapets, wriggle under garden gates, Scrabble among fuchsias and pebbles, Batter at sand-bagged doorways, Savage buckets and brushes and a child's forgotten shoe; With a frothing of bladderwrack They bluster and topple And ebb back to the strand. The waves of sand Flood, swell, impend, And do not ebb at all. The dunes stalk the town, Month by month stretching an extra ripple, A brown reinforcing roll. They are shovelling the warrens out of the front street; They are sweeping the foreshore from the window-sills. Backyard elders and shed and allotment fences Stand swamped to the knees in the dry silicic flood, And litter-bins lie buried to the collar. Away on the hawes the turf rebukes the dunes. The waves of sand subside, the yellow swell Calms to a green trough. Rest-harrow, bedstraw and the wiry dyer's greenweed Fit a wickered raft of raffia Along the trapped tide the moon's pull Can magnet scarcely a grain above mean sand level. In the neap of the day the natterjack toad Occupies an urgent, emergent terrain Of slithery hillocks and furrows and finger nail screes. The spiked marram's springy knitting-needles Purl and entangle what concrete cannot conquer And the green holds back the brown. Plant, then, the green, plant marram, plant buckthorn; Let sea-holly not be uprooted; Entrench the town behind a fortified zone of grass. For landward from the horizon the waves of the sea Flood and ebb, Flood and ebb, But here on the verge of the surge the waves of sand Flood, swell, Poise themselves, and, For a little while, Stay still.
<> Their wings with all the autumn distance filled, From Isis' valley border hundred-hilled, The rooks are crowding home as evening lowers: Not for men only and their musing hours, By battled walls did gracious Wykeham build These dewy spaces early sown and stilled, These dearest inland melancholy bowers. Blest birds! A book held open on the knee Below, is all they know of Adam's blight: With surer art the while, and simpler rite, They follow Truth in some monastic tree, Where breathe against their innocent breasts by night The scholar's star, the star of sanctity.
<> The fragments of his shiny hand Enfolding all that he may own Of aliment for empty bone, The windowed chamber of his skull Unblurred with flesh, a leaking hull Without enclosure for the freight Of thought it has not held of late. Here then he stays; and staying risks The tenantry of basilisks, And raises for the buzzard's brood A chimera of plenitude That has no base: the simple bone Denies all hunger but its own And his who lingers here, his thirst More frantic than it was at first: He never knew so full a drouth As this that locks his brittle mouth, Nor, of himself, observed a fast So strait as this he keeps at last. Whatever hungers drew apart the sinews of his shapely heart, He never felt so stern a want As this his bones supinely vaunt; And though he prayed for this, for death And its sweet seizure of his breath, Envisaging some recompense For his long, awful indigence, Here now he lies impoverished Beyond all thought: the death he wished Presenting to his hollowed eye The mockery of empty sky.
between nose-red gross wallssprawling with tipsy tables the abominable floor belches smoky laughter into the filigree frame of a microscopic stage whose jouncing curtain.,rises upon one startling doll undressed in unripe green with nauseous spiderlegs and excremental hair and the eyes of the mother of god who spits seeds of dead song about home and love from her transfigured face a queer pulp of ecstasy while in the battered bodies the odd unlovely souls struggleslowlyandwrithe like caught.brave:flies;
&lsquo;If nothing works&rsquo;, he thumbed her lip, &lsquo;I could kill you to keep you.&rsquo; She half-heard that; the day flooded with chances. Sunlight drilled at the shutters. She went to the window. She touched herself lightly, between the legs, like someone alone. Breakfast first and then an expedition. The streets were hotting up. Each vendor's stall wore a fringe of crucifixes. &lsquo;Can you hear?&rsquo; His petitions could be stacked, she thought, and counted, like loose change.
In the backyard of our house on Norwood, there were five hundred steel cages lined up, each with a wooden box roofed with tar paper; inside, two stories, with straw for a bed. Sometimes the minks would pace back and forth wildly, looking for a way out; or else they'd hide in their wooden houses, even when we'd put the offering of raw horse meat on their trays, as if they knew they were beautiful and wanted to deprive us. In spring the placid kits drank with glazed eyes. Sometimes the mothers would go mad and snap their necks. My uncle would lift the roof like a god who might lift our roof, look down on us and take us out to safety. Sometimes one would escape. He would go down on his hands and knees, aiming a flashlight like a bullet of light, hoping to catch the orange gold of its eyes. He wore huge boots, gloves so thick their little teeth couldn't bite through. &ldquo;They're wild,&rdquo; he'd say. &ldquo;Never trust them.&rdquo; Each afternoon when I put the scoop of raw meat rich with eggs and vitamins on their trays, I'd call to each a greeting. Their small thin faces would follow as if slightly curious. In fall they went out in a van, returning sorted, matched, their skins hanging down on huge metal hangers, pinned by their mouths. My uncle would take them out when company came and drape them over his arm the sweetest cargo. He'd blow down the pelts softly and the hairs would part for his breath and show the shining underlife which, like the shining of the soul, gives us each character and beauty.
Wherefore half-mast and waving sadly  And seeming ill-disposed to move, Are those bright emblems which so gladly  Were wont to wave our homes above? And why is all this lamentation?  And why those outward signs of woe? And why is this all-glorious nation  Thus in her hour of hope bowed low? Wherefore those marks of grief and sorrow  So visible on every face? To what foul deed of bloody horror  Do all those gloomy signs retrace? Aback to the walls and lofty spire!  Back to the Nation's Halls of State! Back to our country's bleeding sire!  Back to our dying Magistrate! We know not why God has permitted  This tragic scene, this bloody deed; An act so seemingly unfitted,  In this auspicious hour of need. Though none perhaps may the intention,  Or the wonderous purpose tell, Of this direful life-suspension   Yet God, the Lord, doeth all things well! Our Nation's Father has been murdered!  Our Nation's Chieftain has been slain! By traitorous hands most basely ordered;  And we, his children, feel the pain. Our pain is mixed with indignation,  Our sorrow is not purely grief, And nothing short of a   From  And we, in sight of earth and heaven,  On bended knee, with lifted hand, Swear as we hope to be forgiven,  To drive foul Treason from the land! And that fair land so long polluted  By the sweat of unpaid toil, Shall be by liberty uprooted,  And thickly spread with freedom's soil. Thus we'll avenge the death of Lincoln,  His noble principles maintain, Till every base inhuman falcon  Is swept from freedom's broad domain; Until from tower and from turret,  From mountain height and prairie wide, One flag shall wave and freedom's spirit  In peace and love o'er all preside.
Never to touch, only to see. Having nothing, I can pretend to everything, an abundance of burning cities in the fourteenth century, the lavish ashes of the fifteenth: anything but small miseries my eyes bring me on air as if on silver plate.  <> distance. I lay claim to that nothing, call it mine. I call it love: nothing I know, Nothing I know you well. How could you leave me with these old paintings of doubtful attribution? In the old paintings there is a patience like the justice which has left me (lonely for the Latin of dominion), or a patience like the justice which sinks claws into my shoulder and will not hunt, justice belled and hooded. Justice is no falcon; it is the cool marble floors of that museum, the velvet ropes anchored to iron posts that keep me from the golden age.  <> Horsemen storm the capital: the gold dome is stripped, the young men sold into slavery, the old men killed, while in the countryside where no one has been told they picnic on dark thick bread and cheese with hard rinds, wine mixed with water, because it's Sunday and they are resting, the silver mines closed. Museum Sundays justice is an island without conviction, a temperate light across the Bosporus or some Scamander winding through the beaten-thin gold air. The faithless loves dance in the foreground, with one figure in the lower corner missing, who has no secrets anymore, and hopes for less devoted days.
failed in what might have been her greatest sceneit had been clear for a week that he was dyingthe doctors had told them as much with- out using the word(although they disliked her(they considered her a blot on his life) they knew she was the person he was thinking about as he lay there with his eyes closed and they must send for her when she came they didn't leave her alone with him but stood across the bed from her as she took his hand and he opened his eyes knowing it was her touchit was her moment she had rehearsed what she wanted to saythat she respected him be- yond anyone she had known but she had never loved him deeply(he was just someone playing oppo- site her on the stage)those were the lines she had preparedshe would render them not with bit- terness but with the terrifying honesty of Racineyet the words would not come they could not be uttered she only pressed his hand and kept her silence.
I never knew there was so much blood in a man until my son killed himself he did it with a kitchen knife stab- bing himself all over and cutting his wriststhen he got into the bathtub and died there in the waterthat's where we found himbut could he have changed his mind for a momentthe floor was a carpet of blood &amp; blood was spat- tered on the walls the basin was cov- ered with blooddid he stand there looking at himself in the mirror still wondering who he really was and then went on with itI had to wipe away the bloodit took me four hours to do it but I couldn't have asked anyone else because after all it was my blood too.
Lazarus lay to see the body turn. The femur first removed itself from arms, The elbows folded under each other soon. The clavicle and vertebrae and shin Divided like the stars and let the air Caress the flesh awake before it fell. Only the torpid brain would not remove. From far away beyond the granite walls A vowel of longing tore the wind in two. Come forth, it said.  <> <> Before the voice the worms began to pray, And fled away howling into the granite. The shin returned to spring a leaping leg, The skull rounded itself upon the brain, The heart arose and cried with joy for pain, The arteries assumed a thud again. And the hair furled furied on the shocking head, And muscles blossomed like the thunderhead That trumpets the pale tropics to green storm. The stones rolling away and the air thrust Into the lung of the cave, Lazarus knew The unholy and indifferent sting of wind Across the flesh of man. Outside, the sun Flayed the same bone as before. Nevertheless His treading skeleton clattered like a choir And waved him forward on a crest of praise. A wall or two away the calling voice Shook like a pacing father, and was still. O blessed fire, O harsh and loving air.
I heard my son burst out of his room and shout, He is here, dad. He is here. I understood and I managed to stand up, melting within, and walk the hall between our rooms to meet Him whom I had neglected in my thoughts; but not my son who was ill and had searched for Him. He had come. I saw Him standing, his hair long, face exhausted, eyes sad and knowing, and I bent my knee, terrified at the reality, but he restrained me with a hand and said, I am a sufferer like yourself. I have come to let you know. And I arose, my heart swelling, and said, I have failed and bitterness is in me. And he replied, And forgiveness too. Bless your son. And I blessed him and his face brightened. And the Rightful One was gone and left a power to feel free.
Shy at first but quick, An alien thing in nature Or lost last season's creature Come back half well, half sick, On poor leathern bat wings Eager and creaking, Blind still and still seeking Where the thin sun sings  Then strong in the array Of an unhoped for season That smoothes the winter lesion Of snowbleeding earth away, And bids bewildered grief Remorselessly make merry For sake of the coming berry And the golden leaf.
<> Not Carthage, not Alexandria, not London. The wide blue river cutting through the stone Arrowy and cool lay down beside her, And the hazy and shining sea lay in the offing. Ferries, pouring the foam before them, sliding Into her groaning timbers, rang and rang; And the chains tumbled taut in the winches. Upstream the matted tugs in the heavy water, Their soiling smoke unwrapped by the salt wind, Footed with snowy trampling and snowy sound. On tethers, pointing the way of the tide, The crusted freighters swung with their sides gushing. On evening's ship pointing northward, A golden sailor at sunset stood at the bow, As aloft in the strands a tramcar with tiny clanging Slowly soared over, far upward and humming still. Not Athens, Alexandria, Vienna or London. And evening vast and clean above the city Washed the high storeys with sea-light, with a silken Sky-tint on the planes and the embrasures: The clump of crags and glitter sinking eastward With the slow world, the shadow-lipping shores, Pale after-conflagration of the air. On terraces, by windows of tiredness, The eyes dropped from that glow to the dusk atremble, Alive with its moving atomic monotone: There the hot taxis at the pounding corner Fitted their glossy flanks and shifted, waiting, And the girls went by with wavering tall walking, Their combed heads nodding in the evening: The hour of shops closing, the cocktail hour, Lighting desire and cigarettes and lighting The strange lamps on the streaming avenue.
Sometimes even now I may Steal a prisoner's holiday, Slip, when all is worst, the bands,  Hurry back, and duck beneath Time's old tyrannous groping hands,  Speed away with laughing breath Back to all I'll never know, Back to you, a year ago. Truant there from Time and Pain, What I had, I find again: Sunlight in the boughs above,  Sunlight in your hair and dress, The Hands too proud for all but Love,  The Lips of utter kindliness, The Heart of bravery swift and clean  Where the best was safe, I knew, And laughter in the gold and green,  And song, and friends, and ever you With smiling and familiar eyes,  You but friendly: you but true. And Innocence accounted wise,  And Faith the fool, the pitiable. Love so rare, one would swear  All of earth for ever well  Careless lips and flying hair,  And little things I may not tell. It does but double the heart-ache  When I wake, when I wake.
I looked, of course, across a crowded bar, Admired at once the perfect sense of poise, Deep chestnut eyes, abruptly squared-off jaw Which made you so much more than pretty. Days Passed uncounted, months, and maybe years Until that Sunday evening when I saw You sitting at a table in the garden, <> &lsquo;You look like something out of Graham Greene,&rsquo; I said absurdly, meaning I suppose You had the air of an expatriate. I might have put it otherwise: &lsquo;You've changed.&rsquo; Immeasurable the distance that can pass Across a glass, and then another glass: The truths and reckless confidence exchanged As a long evening grows to over-late. No real surprise to see the cracks appear. We knew them all along: the tear, the scar Which makes us so much more than perfect, through A lifetime spent on books and booze and boys, On things that were, or even things that are.
Don't mope. Like Rome it will not be built in a day, unlike those raised barns or Kingdom Halls we've heard of with their pools of labour, the elders checking each side of the plumb-line, the daughters and their pitchers of milk, full beyond the brim. Their footings are sunk before breakfast, by sundown the last stone is dressed and laid. Don't let's kid ourselves, we know less about third-degree burns than we did about blowlamps. Don't forget: it's three of sand to one of cement, butter the tile and not the wall, half a pound of spilt nails will sweep clean with a magnet, soot keeps coming and coming, sandpaper smells like money. Don't do that when I'm painting. Don't begin anything with one imperial spanner and a saw so blunt we could ride bare-arse to London on it. Also, when you hold down that square yard of beech and your eyes widen and knuckles whiten as the shark's fin of the jigsaw blade creeps inland ... don't move a muscle. And don't you believe it: those stepladders are not an heirloom but a death trap; they will snap tight like crocodile teeth with me on top and a poor swimmer. Don't turn up with till rolls like stair carpets. Don't blame me if the tiles back flip from the wall or the shower-head swallow-dives into the tub and cracks it. Don't give up hope till the week arrives when  the corner turned, its back broken, and everything comes on in leaps and bounds that even Bob Beamon would be proud of. OK, that's a light-year away but like a mountain it's there. Don't look down. Don't say it.
I have seen 21 beautiful and naked Aphrodites, each one arching her small right foot, her slender arms clasping the shift of wind against her breasts. One can desire what may scarcely be believed in, one can admire the dozen Hercules and Herakleses, archaic heroes of the unprotected private parts, so strong the skins of their flayed lions seem to grow from their own shoulders  these, the idols of an Age of Error. Not to be said, though, of the bronze mouse 1&frac14; inches high blowing a trumpet, one small paw and elbow stopping his own ears.
Jim just loves to garden, yes he does. He likes nothing better than to put on his little overalls and his straw hat. He says, &ldquo;Let's go get those tools, Jim.&rdquo; But then doubt begins to set in. He says, &ldquo;What is a garden, anyway?&rdquo; And thoughts about a &ldquo;modernistic&rdquo; garden begin to trouble him, eat away at his resolve. He stands in the driveway a long time. &ldquo;Horticulture is a groping in the dark into the obscure and unfamiliar, kneeling before a disinterested secret, slapping it, punching it like a Chinese puzzle, birdbrained, babbling gibberish, dig and destroy, pull out and apply salt, hoe and spray, before it spreads, burn roots, where not desired, with gloved hands, poisonous, the self-sacrifice of it, the self-love, into the interior, thunderclap, excruciating, through the nose, the earsplitting necrology of it, the withering, shriveling, the handy hose holder and Persian insect powder and smut fungi, the enemies of the iris, wireworms are worse than their parents, there is no way out, flowers as big as heads, pock-marked, disfigured, blinking insolently at me, the me who so loves to garden because it prevents the heaving of the ground and the untimely death of porch furniture, and dark, murky days in a large city and the dream home under a permanent storm is also a factor to keep in mind.&rdquo;
The heat warping eyesight and rising in shimmers over stubble already charred to the ground, the temperature in the waterbag drops slung beneath a cold-blooded wandoo searing air rips moisture from its pulpy skin, rapid evaporation inducing such a chill at the core of the canvas goitre that the world is turned upside down.
Who recalls the twilight and the rang&egrave;d tents in order  (Violet peaks uplifted through the crystal evening air?) And clink of iron teacups and the piteous, noble laughter,  And the faces of the Sisters with the dust upon their hair? (Now and not hereafter, while the breath is in our nostrils,  Now and not hereafter, ere the meaner years go by  Let us now remember many honourable women,  Such as bade us turn again when we were like to die.) Who recalls the morning and the thunder through the foothills,  (Tufts of fleecy shrapnel strung along the empty plains?) And the sun-scarred Red-Cross coaches creeping guarded to the culvert,  And faces of the Sisters looking gravely from the trains? (When the days were torment and the nights were clouded terror,  When the Powers of Darkness had dominion on our soul  When we fled consuming through the Seven Hells of Fever,  These put out their hands to us and healed and made us whole.) Who recalls the midnight by the bridge's wrecked abutment,  (Autumn rain that rattled like a Maxim  And the lightning-dazzled levels and the streaming, straining wagons,  And the faces of the Sisters as they bore the wounded in? (Till the pain was merciful and stunned us into silence   When each nerve cried out on God that made the misused clay; When the Body triumphed and the last poor shame departed   These abode our agonies and wiped the sweat away.) Who recalls the noontide and the funerals through the market,  (Blanket-hidden bodies, flagless, followed by the flies?) And the footsore firing-party, and the dust and stench and staleness,  And the faces of the Sisters and the glory in their eyes? (Bold behind the battle, in the open camp all-hallowed,  Patient, wise, and mirthful in the ringed and reeking town, These endured unresting till they rested from their labours   Little wasted bodies, ah, so light to lower down!) Yet their graves are scattered and their names are clean forgotten,  Earth shall not remember, but the Waiting Angel knows Them that died at Uitvlugt when the plague was on the city   Her that fell at Simon's Town  Wherefore we they ransomed, while the breath is in our nostrils,  Now and not hereafter ere the meaner years go by  Praise with love and worship many honourable women,  Those that gave their lives for us when we were like to die!
&lsquo;Edward back from the Indian Sea, What have you brought for Nancy?&rsquo; &lsquo;A rope of pearls and a gold earring, And a bird of the East that will not sing, A carven tooth, a box with a key &rsquo; &lsquo;God be praised you are back,&rsquo; says she, &lsquo;Have you nothing more for your Nancy?&rsquo; &lsquo;Long as I sailed the Indian Sea I gathered all for your fancy; Toys and silk and jewels I bring, And a bird of the East that will not sing: What more can you want, dear girl, from me?&rsquo; &lsquo;God be praised you are back,&rsquo; said she, &lsquo;Have you nothing better for Nancy?&rsquo; &lsquo;Safe and home from the Indian Sea, And nothing to take your fancy?&rsquo; &lsquo;You can keep your pearls and your gold earring, And your bird of the East that will not sing, But, Ned, have you  Than heathenish gew-gaw toys?&rsquo; says she, &lsquo;Have you nothing better for Nancy?&rsquo;
<> Swims in among the stars, And I am filled with strangeness, With wild mysterious fears, I plead deep, deep in me With all the gods who bless This world with light and beauty,  Or any god that hears,  That I may watch a while A dawn with gold clouds flying, And walk a country mile And see a human face, Before my soul goes crying Through the waste loneliness Of weird and starless space....
And this day it was Spring.... us drew lewdly the murmurous minute clumsy smelloftheworld.We intricately alive,cleaving the luminous stammer of bodies (eagerly just not each other touch)seeking,some street which easily tickles a brittle fuss of fragile huge humanity.... Numb thoughts,kicking in the rivers of our blood,miss by how terrible inches speech it made you a little dizzy did the world's smell (but i was thinking why the girl-and-bird of you move.... moves..... and also,i'll admit ) till,at the corner of Nothing and Something,we heard a handorgan in twilight playing like hell
As George Washington hacked at his cherry tree, Joseph said to him This is the tree that fed Mary When she lingered by the way. As George Washington polished his bright blade, Joseph told him This cherry tree Bent down and nourished the mother and her babe. As George Washington felled the cherry tree, Voices of root and stem Cried out to him In heavenly accents, but he heard not what they had to say. Rather, he was making A clearing in the wilderness, A subtle discrimination Of church and state, By which his little hatchet Harvested a continental Bumper crop for Mary Of natural corn.
<>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>  Tock.  <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>   <>
What was his name? Drank gin from a used paper cup, wasn't even break time yet. Sitting on a Hi-Lo, his muscled arms hung over the wheel. Between us white dust covered with sulphur, the dream of a farm. &ldquo;In a few years ought to have five head of cattle and a tractor.&rdquo; 9 years and 283 miles to the south side, the voices in the Whole Truth Mission singing gospel. &ldquo;But I came right here to Mt. Elliott Street. Wasn't no future praisin' Jesus.&rdquo;
The Puritans at Plymouth stayed Drunk all year in the tropic weather. They set their phallic may-poles up And danced all night with Increase Mather. And thus, says Michael Wigglesworth, The Pagan Fathers brought to birth The freest culture known on earth. Johnny Appleseed one day Took Washington across his knee And whaled the living daylights out For chopping down the cherry tree. The national history thus is one Of democratic action, Says Sylvan S. Historian. Through Uncas and Geronimo The War of the Elect was won, And wage and chattel slaves were freed Following Shays' Rebellion. So we unite all principles, With profane Greek and Talmud skills, Says the sweet singer of General Mills. Haywood, the Peoples' Commissar, After the Diet of Wounded Knee, Adopted the theses of Joe Hill The Delegate for Poetry. So history proves what we all knew: We're revolutionary too, Croons the Partisan Review. Then why does each mad house, every jail Fill up while through th' indifferent sky (Where glow the heavens with last steps of day) The bombers and the generals fly? Bemused across the campus grass, Seeing darkly, as through a glass, The earnest history students pass.
<>  That I may cheer the aged and the young; That I may charm the little child,  And make the winds of age seem mild. Give me the willing hand and ready feet,  To raise the brother lying in the street; Give me the honest heart that has no fear,  That with the humble I may shed a tear. Give me the eye of faith that I may see  Some good accomplished daily, Lord, for Thee  Give me a heart full of Thy holy zeal.  That I my neighbors' joy or woe may feel. Give me the feet that eagerly will run  About the Master's work, until the sun Has faded in its glory in the west,  And all the busy world has sought its rest.
Your sad and thoughtful love I heard Above the tumult of despair. You bent your head, I touched your hair, The sign was timed without a word. Great woman-beast of sex you are. I see you now as myth and dream Completed, more than what you seem, The friendly-foe, the near-and-far. Within and outside every trance I lived with you, you spoke my name, Repeatedly you spoke my name To celebrate the ritual dance You learnt so well. Your gentle hands Were eloquent, your eyes were bright. You wondered why you feared the night So many years in barren lands. The long and partly lyric view, The self-renewing warmth, the voice To indicate decisive choice, And storms of love I wish for you.
Before the sun has left the sky, one minute  One dear minute, before the journeying in night, To call to mind the things that are forgotten  Now in the dust of ages lost from sight. Like foam of a wave on a lonely seacoast breaking,  Like the wind's song where there's no ear to mind, I know they&lsquo;re calling, calling to us vainly   Old unremembered things of humankind. Exploit and skill of early generations,  From tiny cottages or mighty hall, Fine tales that centuries ago were scattered,  The gods that nobody knows now at all. Little words of old, fugitive languages  That were sprightly on the lips of men And pretty to the ear in the prattle of children   But no one's tongue will call on them again, Oh, generations on the earth unnumbered,  Their divine dreams, fragile divinity  Is only silence left to the hearts&rsquo; affections  That once rejoiced and grieved as much as we? Often when I'm alone and it's near nightfall,  I yearn to acknowledge you and know each one. Is there no way fond memory can keep you,  Forgotten ancient things of the family of man?
They talk of the triumph of the machine, but the machine will never triumph. Out of the thousands and thousands of centuries of man the unrolling of ferns, white tongues of the acanthus lapping at the sun, for one sad century machines have triumphed, rolled us hither and thither, shaking the lark's nest till the eggs have broken. Shaken the marshes, till the geese have gone and the wild swans flown away singing the swan-song of us. Hard, hard on the earth the machines are rolling, but through some hearts they will never roll. The lark nests in his heart and the white swan swims in the marshes of his loins, and through the wide prairies of his breast a young bull herds his cows, lambs frisk among the daisies of his brain. And at last all these creatures that cannot die, driven back into the uttermost corners of the soul, will send up the wild cry of despair. The trilling lark in a wild despair will trill down arrows from the sky, the swan will beat the waters in rage, white rage of an enraged swan, even the lambs will stretch forth their necks like serpents, like snakes of hate, against the man in the machine: even the shaking white poplar will dazzle like splinters of glass against him. And against this inward revolt of the native creatures of the soul mechanical man, in triumph seated upon the seat of his machine will be powerless, for no engine can reach into the marshes and depths of a man. So mechanical man in triumph seated upon the seat of his machine will be driven mad from within himself, and sightless, and on that day the machines will turn to run into one another traffic will tangle up in a long-drawn-out crash of collision and engines will rush at the solid houses, the edifice of our life will rock in the shock of the mad machine, and the house will come down. Then, far beyond the ruin, in the far, in the ultimate, remote places the swan will lift up again his flattened, smitten head and look round, and rise, and on the great vaults of his wings will sweep round and up to greet the sun with a silky glitter of a new day and the lark will follow trilling, angerless again, and the lambs will bite off the heads of the daisies for very friskiness. But over the middle of the earth will be the smoky ruin of iron the triumph of the machine.
<> And ships gone to wreck here and the passers-by remember it with talk on the deck at night as they near it. Fists have beaten on the face of this old prize-fighter And his battles have held the sporting pages and on the street they indicate him with their right fore-finger as one who once wore a championship belt. A hundred stories have been published and a thousand rumored About why this tall dark man has divorced two beau- tiful young women And married a third who resembles the first two and they shake their heads and say, &ldquo;There he goes,&rdquo; when he passes by in sunny weather or in rain along the city streets.
How many silent centuries sleep in my sultry veins? The cries of tribal dancers call from far-off buried plains; The plaintive songs of India, the melodies of Spain; The rhythms of their tom-tom drums; Of Red men seeking southern lands, Of Africans in chains. They call me from their tombs and thrones; From many distant climes; They whisper old and sacred names: Each intonation chimes An ancient and familiar rite For primitive and erudite. I hear them wail loud echoings. Locked deep inside of me they cry  And wild their clamorings! Blood rituals of men and gods Speak pitiless, and shriek. And crashing barriers of time These dark imprisoned sons Of all my wild ancestral hosts Break from their time-locked sea To make these modern, sensate sons Immortal men, and free.
We told the old ambassador to quit: &ldquo;These brutal lies you have to tell defame us and you.&rdquo; &ldquo;No, I am on the team,&rdquo; he said, and was unhappy saying it. Now he has dropped down in a London street and every one is weeping over him. He said, &ldquo;It's not the way we play the game, to quit to make a point.&rdquo; The flag is at half-mast in Springfield. A bombardier reasons loudly for us in Asia. Our sons will be commanded to the senseless war  but many will not go that does not cease generation after generation: this has been no worse, but there may be no more.
No wonder The river Humber Lies in a silken slumber. For it is dawn And over the newly warm Earth the mists turn, Wrapping their gentle fringes Upon the river where it hinges Upon the perfect sleep of perfected images. Quiet in the thought of its felicity, A graven monument of sufficiency Beautiful in every line the river sleeps complacently. And hardly the dawn distinguishes Where a miasma languishes Upon the waters' farther reaches. Lapped in the sleeping consciousness Of its waves' happiness Upon the mudbanks of its approaches, The river Humber Turns again to deeper slumber, Deeper than deeps in joys without number.
<>   <>   <> <> <>   <>   <> <> <>   <>   <> <>
The first ones in the door of the plant-filled office were the twins, fresh from the upper grades, their matched coats dangling open. And then their more compliant brother, leading the dear stuffed tottering creature amazing that she could lift her leg high enough to cross the threshold to the waiting room. Then the woman, the patient, carrying the baby in an infant seat, his every inch of flesh swaddled against the vicious weather. Once inside, how skillfully the mother unwound the many layers  and now so quickly must restore them: news from the lab has passed through the nurse's sliding window. The youngest, strapped again into his shell, fusses for the breast, the twins tease their sister, the eight-year-old looks almost wise as his mother struggles into her coat with one hand and with the other pinches his sweaty neck, her hissed threats swarming his face like flies. Now she's gone. The women who remain don't need to speak. Outside, snow falls in the streets and quiet hills, and seems, in the window, framed by the room's continuous greenery, to obliterate the wide and varied world. We half-smile, half-nod to one another. One returns to her magazine. One shifts gently to the right arm her sleeping newborn, unfurls the bud of its hand. One of us takes her turn in the inner office where she submits to the steel table and removes from her body its stubborn wish. We want what you want, only we have to want it more.
women your age have decided wars and the beat of poems your grandfather is a poet and loves you pay attention to your lessons an inkling of what beauty means to a girl your age may dawn soon upon you life is a flower when it opens you will look trembling into it unsure of what the traditional mirror may reveal between hope and despair while a timorous old man doubtfully half turns away his foolish head a bunch of violets clutched in your idle hand gives him a place beside you which he cherishes his back turned from you casually appearing not to look he yearns after you protectively hopelessly wanting nothing
We have bit no forbidden apple,  Eve and I, Yet the splashes of day and night Falling round us, no longer dapple The same valley with purple and white. This is our own still valley,  Our Eden, our home; But day shows it vivid with feeling, And the pallor of night does not tally With dark sleep that once covered the ceiling. The little red heifer: to-night I looked in her eyes;  She will calve to-morrow. Last night, when I went with the lantern, the sow was grabbing her  litter With snarling red jaws; and I heard the cries Of the new-born, and then, the old owl, then the bats that flitter. And I woke to the sound of the wood-pigeon, and lay and listened  Till I could borrow A few quick beats from a wood-pigeon's heart; and when I did  rise Saw where morning sun on the shaken iris glistened. And I knew that home, this valley, was wider than Paradise. I learned it all from my Eve,  The warm, dumb wisdom; She's a quicker instructress than years; She has quickened my pulse to receive Strange throbs, beyond laughter and tears. So now I know the valley  Fleshed all like me With feelings that change and quiver And clash, and yet seem to tally, Like all the clash of a river  Moves on to the sea.
<> One day will be quiet, Glacial darkness enter in Where was ache and riot; Heart that shook its prison bars, Though yet confined, be still, Blind to twilight-fingers drawn Across the wooded hill; Feet that followed underbrush Early year and late, Be set forever on a road Narrow, dark and straight; And sun-brown flesh go down to lie Gleamless, beauty-bare, Till bladed hand again shall grasp The blue and amber air.
They say love is a great heat. In these high hot days, then, let us consider the land: The peony bursts and the sun draws off its colour, Great unwinking light, morning and evening, lies on either hand; Iron in the sky sucks moisture from under concrete, Day after day the noon blares &lsquo;Here I stand&rsquo;. And love, they say, is like a roaring wind Reversing the grasses; lain low they reveal Their white uncommon underside; it lashes The lake's back to an edge scraping a scar in the bank that will   never heal. The animal rages across the country, it is A wind, like Orpheus, to make the trees kneel. Then the tired cooling comes, and in the town Sapless lies wreckage that the winds brought down. But no one says that love is changeable The start-stop rain that has us all in doubt; A sun enough only to bring out flies; Wind that pushes our hopes scudding from the horizon, now   promise now wash-out; Front line forever lost: as finally Enemy melted no victory, no rout. Underground stalks fill as the rain seeps in The earth withstands the drought and hurricane.
Those were the lazy days, the wavy days of grass, and wisps of smoke from picnic fires. You'd hear faint rain on leaves, no hissing tyres. Sheep grazed abandoned atriums, a maze of cats had scratched the porter's yucca bare. Balsa canoes swished through the meadowsweet down where the river met the dolphin's street. The porter snored, or jogged in the sea air. A broken music-box from the old times played half a tune, played half; the rest hovered absently among the hum and cigarettes of the card-players. &lsquo;More limes!&rsquo; they cried. The cordial passed its test. The boy wound and rewound, the box was dumb.
american critic ad 1935 alias faggoty slob with a sob in whose cot tony onceaweek whisper winsomely pul ling their wool over 120 mil lion goats each and every one a spot less lamb :nothing in any way sugge stive ;nothing to which anyone might possibly obje ct .&amp; you know all he's got to do is just men tion something &amp; it sells ten ooo copies.won derful.isn't it that poor man must read all the time. read why I'd read in my sleep for half that mon ey.you don't mean he.did i say anything again st.wasn't that a.wasn't it.by what was the.such a funny name) into which world is noone born alive
It was early fall. You rowed me around the pond in your ancient boat. Tart apples lay in a bag with the cheese. I read you a story about two women who could not stop touching each other. Trumpeter swans paddled close and you tossed hard French bread at their black beaks. When you got cold I gave you my jacket, the leather glistened like a delicate skin moving through trees. You let the oars float in the oarlocks; you let the boat drift in circles. You let the women from the story climb into the boat. I could not stop staring. Soon their desire took up so much room we had to throw the apples overboard. We had to sit cramped at one end. Finally we just waded in and hauled the skiff and the women to the pier. The story got wet. The pond was a dark wound. You unlocked the car and touched my back, a kindness, as if I'd always been your lover.
Yours is a wind even the beanfields bend before. Branches that smell of sky Lean with a creaking sigh under its lofty blowing, Under its passing by. Grass in the marsh bends its lean back to the salt wet, To the bitter frost. And the black tossed heads of rushes lifting to the sunlight Break and are lost. Stones on the hill shrug up their shoulders stiffened and cold. You will not be content With boughs rent out of heaven forever and ever, With stones bent. Your wind will come out of the high places and pathways To the dust's dim core. Leaf by leaf, silver and small, yours is a wind The beanfields bend before.
Well, the white asters are wide open (there's even a chicory blossom or two left on a big weed) but it's too cold for the bees to come: every now and then a snowflake streaks out of the hanging gray, winter's first whitening: white on white let it be, then, flake to petal to hold for a minute or so: meanwhile, golden bees are milling at the door, to pour out should that other gold, the sun, break in.
Planets (newsprint-wrapped souvenirs, shopworn, comatose with dust; spheres sent out like postcards with stamps disposed and pasted into ersatz-leathered, grandiose collectors' books with every hemisphere waiting in a blurry-inked veneer's faded doppelg&auml;nger to adhere a ragged postage's pinking-sheared edges) circumnavigate through atmosphere as down hospital corridors invalids steer their push and pull of slippers and canes, crushing sanguine roses to pallid lips. Matter lifts its bruised, petaled mouth again, coiled under a florist's veil of cellophane. Earth, bowed head left in the guillotine, wants to take the cosmos in sips: to fold its ever-ripening into descending lobes and carpels of a rose's endless incarnadine.
blue stars like infinity's moons, bells on moon so distant, the sun like a heart lost from sight faint bubbles faint memories, moon &amp; earth crossing at moonrise, blue perfumes, islands &amp; oceans, dim paths to the moon. is moon the moon of deserts? spiderweb moon or a violet moon over cities? the dead moon of legends? a white moon? the moon cracked &amp; soundless? lost in small towns? a stainedglass moon shining on graves? reflecting all colors? a green moon? the moon over Paris? a true moon of color moon &amp; star &amp; the chrysalis moonsublime in her frantic word  who is lady at sunset breeds stars spider's sisters, o sunset sunsetgoldblack o Salomepalace of kisses moon &amp; Salome this beautiful chrysalis, sleep, like SalomeMedusa like moon o Salome Salome o sky that moon's fixed to leave, moon crying thru mouth thru lips, darkest desert with shadowy smokea cocoon for her soulnight &amp; day water trembling, moon with the head of the moon &amp; love in her eyes is moon's endless story
When did the garden with its banked flowers start to smell like a funeral chapel, and the mild breeze passing our foreheads to feel like the back of a nurse's hand testing for fever? We used to be immortal in our ignorance, sending our kites up for the lightning, swimming in unknown waters at night and naked. Death was a kind of safety net to catch us if we fell too far. Remember Elaine standing in April, a child on one hip for ballast, her head distracted with poems? The magician waved and bowed, showed us his empty sleeves and she was gone.
Stymied in my leave-taking I ponder the two vacant days I have spent in this river town; My first impression was its cold Resemblance to Cleveland, Where through crowded districts, Blocks of empty lots crowd The crowded into the old Slave quarters. Weary with its dankness, The slow ebullient waters, Bland, the pinched Houses, abandoned Flights from disaster, I harbour That festered wound Internal, and the silence Of each poisoned day's burning.
Hunger of mountains spoke from a tiger's throat. Tiger-tooth peaks. The moon. A thousand mists turning. Desires of mountains like the desires of women, moon-drawn, distant, clear black among confusions of silver. Women of Chiapas! Dream-borne voices of women. Splinters of mountains, broken obsidian, silver. White tigers haunting your forehead here sloped in shadow  black hungers of women, confusion turning like tigers And your voice  I am almost asleep almost awake in your arms.
It takes you so long to rise to your feet I feel the heave of each heavy ounce and your body's bewilderment that one side is stiff as a frostbound towel on the line. You shuffle-step to an overheated room where three deaf men are lining up pens, tracing their picture-thoughts on air. I sign, tape down your paper, on mine draw the long blue ribbons of a waterfall, you at its foot stroking the tight scarlet heads of chiffon roses on a scarf I gave you. You sketch a lopsided rock and a face in profile. I can't extract meaning from your stream of wordless sounds until a humming begins in your throat and I realise the rock's a radio. Your wrists lift to miraculous lightness, dance knuckles in the air. An African rhythm sways your trunk, tugs my shoulders and hips. The deaf men grasp the quickened beat, finger its fabric, go out wearing smiles. The station is a shell filled with raw December morning but the scarves hooked to perches in the Tie Rack's glass cage, flaunt tropical plumage. I want them all, choose one with interleaving tongues of mango, magenta, lavender, ice-pink. As I wrap it round my neck I know you will laugh at the colours, pillow your cheek on the polyester silk, knot it over the woollen band that hides the unsightly hollow below your crown. Beyond the taut faces by the departures board is yours shining through lightless January.
Mr. Morosini, a widower, lived alone in his Chicago apartment on the near North Side. He taught scales, arpeggios, and each week assigned another of the  by A. M. R. Barrett, first oboe of the Royal Italian Opera, Covent Garden. &ldquo;A big shot,&rdquo; he said. Always before the lesson I soaked my reed in a glass of water so it would vibrate. &ldquo;Use water, not whiskey,&rdquo; said Mr. Morosini, who thought that was funny. &ldquo;Poor fingers,&rdquo; he said, when I made mistakes. &ldquo;Maybe we soak  He was old, Italian. I was fourteen, a beginner. He had a lot to tell me: how to project, how to support the tone with muscles of the stomach. &ldquo;Very important, the muscles of the stomach.&rdquo; After two years I could play the solo from  to his satisfaction, and he complimented me: my intonation was good, and my high notes were getting stronger. He showed me where to breathe in the Mozart. Then he himself played the whole first movement straight through without stopping, and up to tempo. <> He could hold his breath a long time. When the lessons were over, we drank tea and ate Ritz crackers in the kitchen where canaries sang. He talked about when he was a student at the Paris Conservatory, practicing seven hours a day, developing his technique until at last he could play out of the fullness of his heart. Sometimes we ate ice cream. And to celebrate certain special occasions  the liberation of Paris, Debussy's birthday  drank out of small green glasses made in Venice, a tablespoon each of imported, prewar Amaretto. He said music was bestowed on us by a power. He said everyone is born worthy. He said there will always be someone who is better than you. He said, never mind.
with cows on stunted stilts and insects walking like Christ on water. Fish leap screaming into my hands. I swallow them. I eat streams and forests. Ditches! How I love green ditches! They hide me. They go nowhere ... lovingly. Somewhere, always, boats are hooting so I run up the gangplank at the end of the street where liners are parked like enormous coffins. Immigrants, tourists, refugees ... Guns go off! Bands are playing. Everyone wants to be somewhere else. There's a rush for uniforms, countries, profit. Sailing away like Kings and Queens hordes of dead parents are smiling and waving.
You entered my sleep, Come with your immense, Luminous eyes, And light brown hair, Across fifty years, To sing for me again that song Of Campion's we loved so once. I kissed your quivering throat. There was no hint in the dream That you were long, long since A new arriv&eacute;d guest, With blithe Helen, white Iope and the rest  Only the peace Of late afternoon In a compassionate autumn In youth. And I forgot That I was old and you a shade.
It doesnt matter what we see there (the mouth is full of sense no taste in listening no sense to hear what twists in the shallow water below the tongue) (and if he says Listen! say Drink the hearing with your own ears, a word is not to hear) A word is not to hear and not to say  what is a word? The Catechism begins: Who made you? Language made me. Why did It make you? It made me to confuse the branch with the wind. Why that? To hide the root. Where is the root? It lies beneath the tongue. Speak it. It lies beneath the speech. Is it a word? A word is the shadow of a body passing. Whose body is that? The shadow's own.
copter over at the zenith whirring sun and how there's been sleep in all this wind eyelids from it, dream maybe there goes one of those pigeons from the ground something the steady sea thoughtless as daylight shiftsgrass makes the earth green year bounds on year
When they're decent about women, they're frightful about children, When they're decent about children, they're rotten about artists, When they're decent about artists, they're vicious about whores, What do we see?What do we not see? When they're kind to whores, they're death on communists, When they respect communists, they're foul to bastards, When they're human to bastards, they mock at hysterectomy  What do we see?What do we not see? When they're decent about surgery, they bomb the Vietnamese, When they're decent to Vietnamese, they're frightful to police, When they're human to police, they rough up lesbians, What do we see?What do we not see? When they're decent to old women, they kick homosexuals, When they're good to homosexuals, they can't stand drug people, When they're calm about drug people, they hate all Germans, What do we see?What do we not see? Cadenza for the reader When they're decent to Jews, they dread the blacks, When they know blacks, there's always something:roaches And the future and children and all potential.Can't stand themselves Will we never see?Will we ever know?
God who made the garden green Made the apple tree to lean And glitter in that shine and sheen. <> Straight of bole and strict of bough, Sons of mine will shape and hew Tree that Eden never knew. <> All to this my sons are born: To hew and shape and raise that tree, And stand beneath in scorn, in scorn .... And on it bear eternity. <> <>
I'm gonna walk to the graveyard 'Hind ma friend Miss Cora Lee. Gonna walk to the graveyard 'Hind ma dear friend Cora Lee Cause when I'm dead some Body'll have to walk behind me. I'm goin' to the po' house To see ma old Aunt Clew. Goin' to the po' house To see ma old Aunt Clew. When I'm old an' ugly I'll want to see somebody, too. The po' house is lonely An' the grave is cold. O, the po' house is lonely, The graveyard grave is cold. But I'd rather be dead than To be ugly an' old. When love is gone what Can a young gal do? When love is gone, O, What can a young gal do? Keep on a-lovin' me, daddy, Cause I don't want to be blue.
Young women at the edge of the sea, you say in your title. That, and more. You died an old man in the year of my birth, you who also lugged around such a long name all the days of your life. Your women make me touch my sunny flesh with theirs. As one lifts the brilliant whisper of her hair from her fair shoulder, another reclines upon hers, its glossy mass spread across gritty stone. Those untouched breasts, how they harden my male nerve, soften my heart, with their undefined nipples, centers tender, warm and blind. Can it be our lives are so contagious one man may die, passing on to another, at birth, such a legacy as this image of young women brushing their hair by the sea, this oceanic eye bluer than any human could ever bear looking through? It is strange, is it not, to be born to a name not your own.
Who do you think stands watching  The snow-tops shining rosy In heaven, now that the darkness  Takes all but the tallest posy? Who then sees the two-winged  Boat down there, all alone And asleep on the snow's last shadow,  Like a moth on a stone? The olive-leaves, light as gad-flies,  Have all gone dark, gone black. And now in the dark my soul to you  Turns back. To you, my little darling,  To you, out of Italy. For what is loveliness, my love,  Save you have it with me! So, there's an oxen wagon  Comes darkly into sight: A man with a lantern, swinging  A little light. What does he see, my darling,  Here by the darkened lake? Here, in the sloping shadow  The mountains make? He says not a word, but passes,  Staring at what he sees. What ghost of us both do you think he saw  Under the olive-trees? All the things that are lovely   The things you never knew  I wanted to gather them one by one  And bring them to you. But never now, my darling,  Can I gather the mountain-tips From the twilight like half-shut lilies  To hold to your lips. And never the two-winged vessel  That sleeps below on the lake Can I catch like a moth between my hands  For you to take. But hush, I am not regretting:  It is far more perfect now. I'll whisper the ghostly truth to you  And tell you how I know you here in the darkness,  How you sit in the throne of my eyes At peace, and look out of the windows  In glad surprise.
We can't admit that we can't make love in our old bed positioned like this. You no longer cook, and I seem to know only three recipes. The towel racks on the floor hoard lint, and like drunks who can't see past a need to stay numb we sit in our rooms unable to work. You spend long days in the city and return to me, talking, but silence always catches up. You think the place is possessed, and I blame the broom we moved despite that superstition against dragging old dirt into new rooms. I can't even pitch scorched pot holders or properly mourn those turquoise walls, dull with eight years of our own grease and happiness. Maybe we grew so fond of the known that we can't arrange ourselves here, and we'll just have to chuck something out with the oversized bookcase and table, or else take a saw to it all and see what turns up with the dust.
The sand's still blue with receding water, sky topples its last brightness down, day diminishing; two fishermen walk over the sandbar, their thin indicative shadows pointing tomorrow's sunrise on the whiteline horizon. Tomorrow is only an interval, night's passing interval cruises on open water here, anchored, while peace comes in. Speedboat, run again before your smoking white wake, while the light's collected on the hull, until the evening turns, engaged with night. The little dog races over the sandflats, the thin bathers turn back to foamline, half-light discourages their daring sea-dream. End it! omens are laughter, gay all morning, gay before ogre midnight, spurless midnight  midnight's an interval, darkness is promise, night's nothing, nightmare is nothing, nothing but interval. Eliminate all dreams:here, real:love come, high tide, the risen, freehold moon, the fortunate island, resting, blue-flooded, rests, delicately, the sea.
An ibis picks between thin veins of grass surfacing on open ground, recently upturned, nourished in mist and exhumed by the morning sun. Stilt-legged it stalks on a pivot, graceful in its geometrics. It is difficult to pinpoint the centre of balance, which imparts a life of its own. In flight it lunges slowly as though it were not meant to be airborne, its legs tight outriggers, mouthpiece a curved pipette drawing and discharging the grey-blue sky. I also remain afloat  an ibis riding the crests and troughs of a changing surface, settling on aspects of thought, treading lightly the outskirts.
To those who sail the salt quotidian sea The tempting siren sings across the flood, But once plunged in, they find her out to be A desert island with a coast of mud. Lulled by the waves, no mortal heart resists The gaudy scenery of the noble bay, That paradisal image which persists In all its brightness to the present day. Each one is Tantalus to what he dreams, The waters of illusion lap his chin, Ready to hand the flattering symbol seems And Tantalus is always taken in. Each day he starts, he leaps towards the goal, Driven along by life's impulsive tide. His wishes are no more in his control Than the bright objects which his eyes provide. Boasting each project absolutely new, His rising sciences, renascent arts, All that he frames has one grand aim in view, One which is not declared but simply starts. Automaton of fate, led on by time, He learns no lesson from repeated pain. Like the old lag, he knows the price of crime And yet he cannot help but try again. Till, one fine day, still hoping against hope In spite of all this once to be exempt From nature's warrant and the hangman's rope, The bourgeois perishes in his attempt.
Little bronze boxer up from the sea, one fistout, the other at chin, you are poised to fight, tensed, alert still, though your rivals no longer threaten, have not for two thousand years. Your dive to the seafloor was a slow count of nine followed by nine and yet nine again, all to the murmurous applause of sharks and twisting eels. And, I suspect, to the sorrow of dolphins. Surely one hovered for years ready to give you a ride. But you were down, down for the count of nine drowning, waves against rock drumming. Christ came and went above you. Seabrine and lime washed their salts over you, gave you this green. Yet you stand game as in that ring of Attica or Crete. And we who see you in today's golden air also hold out with some courage, besieged. That's why we greet you as brother, stand you near in light we must warn you of, rain that afflicts, umpires unfair as they come. Yet, Brother, we try to get back all the sea took even as great Jupiter takes his defeat in the West.
<>  When I am old, Never to feel in soul doubt's spiritual rime;  The heart grow cold With self; but in me that which warms my time. Never to feel the drouth, the dearth that kills,  Before one dies, Of mind, full-flowering on thought's fertile hills;  But, in my skies, The falcon, Fancy, that no season kills. Never to see the shadow at my door,  Nor fear its fall; But wait serenely, whether rich or poor,  Nor care at all, So Love sits with me at my open door. Never to have a dream I dreamed destroyed:  And towards the last Live o'er again all that I have enjoyed,   The happy Past,  Through these, the dreams, no time has yet destroyed. Never to lose my love for lowly things;  To feel the need For simple beauty still: each bird that sings,  Each flower and weed That looks its message of unguessed-at things. Never to lose my faith in Nature, God:  But still to find Worship in trees; religion in each sod;  And in the wind Sermons that breathe the universal God. Never to age in mind; much less in heart;  But keep them young With song, glad song, that still shall have its part,   Sung or unsung,  Within the inmost temple of my heart. That I may lose not all my trust in men!  And, through it, grow Nearer to Heaven and God: and softly then  Meet Death and know He has no terrors for my soul. Amen.
2 Gaps. Regular straining. Great rips in the febrile goods Gapes. A leftover intending. 7Wide awake confusions. Then drowsy illness. Ill, at ease. Then deep imageless sequence of words as blackout. Confused, aroused; 8Two or three occasional endearing clear statement of a tea pot, a sculptural head, a cat asleep.
The front door bangs and I creep downstairs in my dressing gown, unable to believe my good luck. It is like Christmas morning long ago, the fields all white, the day like an unopened present. I can do whatever I like. I can move the furniture back against the wall. I can dance a jig in the hall. I can sit completely still reading a book about Aristotle. I can do nothing at all. Later on, I sit down to supper with myself, having opened a bottle of wine. I touch my glass to the TV screen in a toast to the BBC. My house is your house, old friend! Stay switched on all the time if you want to. With a glass in my hand I make the tour of my property  a lap of honour to celebrate my victory. As I cruise the house, humming to myself, I set things in motion as I pass, curtains and cups and kitchen implements sway to and fro at my touch, even the chandelier swings back and forth in cheerful valediction to absent friends. A birdcage hanging from the ceiling tolls like a bell for my new found liberation.
To learn what to say to unlearn The order of islands here The number of fingers made from ideas certainBulgariaanywhere groundsstairwaystatement normalnaturecases Visitors from the Dog Star filling up the house Words for  If I knew it it's what I thought If I knew it it's what I thought If I knew it it's what I thought it was
Through the window of the train the houses shake like out-takes from a hand-held cine-film until the tube goes underground, and then the light picks out a cable running close alongside. Who is this guy at Seven Sisters who smells like an attic; who wants to frighten me by tugging at my cuffs, by shouting without words and squeaking like a wet balloon? He is deaf and dumb and I speak to him like a goldfish. His eyes roll. He touches his pale, milky fingers to my lips and tests the weight of each word, he catches every word. We are sat on the floor to play this game: he puts his hand against his drawing pad and makes me trace again and again with a crayon the outline of its simple shape. We share a smile. I have to leave. He is frantic but only for a second as he sets off down the train, pictures of perfect hands slipping from his folder, waving for a moment in the air then landing by the shoes of other passengers.
<> With names stretching two hundred miles or more, For timid wives to read the night before The latch-string on the front door slowly fell, Leaving them, just a moment, staring hard Against the door, as if a door could close Tighter the last time than the doors of those Who had no prairie wagons in the yard. Although the scrawny legends overlapped The wilderness with bitter high deceit, Such wives at dusk could still smile when they came Within a mile or two of what was mapped, Dreaming of harbor, while thick oxen feet Drummed toward some empty place that had a name.
Half-bridge over nothingness, White sky of the palette knife; blot orange, Vertical blacks; blue, birdlike, Drifting up from the next life, The heat-waves, like consolation, wince  One cloud, like a trunk, stays shut Above the horizon; off to the left, dream-wires, Hill-snout like a crocodile's. Or so I remember it, Their clenched teeth in their clenched mouths, Their voices like shards of light, Brittle, unnecessary. Ruined shoes, roots, the cabinet of lost things: This is the same story, Its lips in flame, its throat a dark water, The page stripped of its meaning. Sunday, and Father Dog is turned loose: Up the long road the children's feet Snick in the dust like raindrops; the wind Excuses itself and backs off; inside, heat Lies like a hand on each head; Slither and cough. Now Father Dog Addles our misconceptions, points, preens, His finger a white flag, run up, run down. Bow-wow and arf, the Great Light; O, and the Great Yes, and the Great No; Redemption, the cold kiss of release, &amp;c.; sentences, sentences. (Meanwhile, docile as shadows, they stare From their four corners, looks set: No glitter escapes This evangelical masonry.) Candleflame; vigil and waterflow: Like dust in the night the prayers rise: From 6 to 6, under the sick Christ, The children talk to the nothingness, Crossrack and wound; the dark room Burns like a coal, goes Ash to the touch, ash to the tongue's tip; Blood turns in the wheel: Something drops from the leaves; the drugged moon Twists and turns in its sheets; sweet breath In a dry corner, the black widow reknits her dream. Salvation again declines, And sleeps like a skull in the hard ground, Nothing for ears, nothing for eyes; It sleeps as it's always slept, without Shadow, waiting for nothing.
The seven years' curse is ended now That drove me forth from this kind land, From mulberry-bough and apple-bough And gummy twigs the west wind shakes, To drink the brine from crusted lakes And grit my teeth on sand. Now for your cold, malicious brain And most uncharitable, cold heart, You, too, shall clank the seven years' chain On sterile ground for all time cursed With famine's itch and flames of thirst, The blank sky's counterpart. The load that from my shoulder slips Straightway upon your own is tied: You, too, shall scorch your finger-tips With scrabbling on the desert's face Such thoughts I had of this green place, Sent scapegoat for your pride. Here, Robin on a tussock sits, And Cuckoo with his call of hope Cuckoos awhile, then off he flits, While peals of dingle-dongle keep Troop-discipline among the sheep That graze across the slope. A brook from fields of gentle sun Through the glade its water heaves, The falling cone would well-nigh stun That Squirrel wantonly lets drop When up he scampers to tree-top And dives among the green. But no, I ask a surer peace Than vengeance on you could provide. So fear no ill from my release: Be off, elude the curse, disgrace Some other green and happy place  This world of fools is wide.
Red be-ings whose history is Adam's apple Guyaba at the entrance To the cave Which Lucifer Entered to Terminate with darkness Taking that ride up the throat Finding the stove of the kitchen Where someone Had been up earlier Cooking Red Beans
&ldquo;Thin Rain, whom are you haunting, That you haunt my door?&rdquo; <> <> &ldquo;Nobody's in the house but me: You may come in if you like and see.&rdquo; Thin as thread, with exquisite fingers,  Ever seen her, any of you?  Grey shawl, and leaning on the wind, And the garden showing through? Glimmering eyes, and silent, mostly, Sort of a whisper, sort of a purr, Asking something, asking it over, If you get a sound from her.  Ever see her, any of you?  Strangest thing I've ever known,  Every night since I moved in, And I came to be alone. &ldquo;Thin Rain, hush with your knocking! You may not come in! This is I that you hear rocking; Nobody's with me, nor has been!&rdquo; Curious, how she tried the window,  Odd, the way she tries the door,  <> <>
He pushes behind the words which, awkward, catch and turn him to a disturbed and fumbling man. What if it all stops. Then silence is as silence was again. What if the last time he was moved to touch, work out in his own mind, such limits was the last  and then a quiet, a dull space of hanging actions, all depending on some time has come and gone. God help him then if such things can. That risk is all there is.
The imperatives of the instincts in abeyance, heart and mind at one in their contemplation of the ripening apple never to fall from the topmost branches of truth's tree. A site for the repair of promises that were broken, for picking up pieces of the smashed dream. It has the freshness of mushrooms, proof of the whiteness darkness can bring forth. It is the timeless place, the unaccommodated moment; an interval in the performance of an unheard music. Do not believe those who have been everywhere but here. Tell the poor of the world there is nothing to pay, no distance to travel; that they are invited to the marriage of here and now; that the crystal in which they look, grey with foreboding as the moon with earth's shadow, has this as its far side, turning necessarily towards us with the reversal of our values.
The scene they play is the midwife's without the midwife. Blood, groans have drained into the gold, and all her pain is inward and to be. The child is like a prophet on her knee. A Doctor of Science. In joy his forehead flexes in its sphere. His hand that claws her face catches her tear.
&lsquo;In eating dandelions it is the flavour you must savour as it lingers on the finger. Press the cut stem down smartly on your finger, and lick the nippy milky ring of flavour.&rsquo; &lsquo;What if I grow besotted with that flavour, hallucinating an ambrosial finger tip to tip with my own milky finger creating charges of supernal flavour?&rsquo; &lsquo;The lamb shall lie down with the dandelion, the tiger shall go mad on tansy wine, the bear shall snort himself asleep in combs. Eat up, and tumble with the dandelion; crown yourself with tansy, dive in wine; burrow into the dripping gorgeous combs.&rsquo;
I met you at the best clip joint in town. I knew right away that you only wanted money, that you belonged to the manager. he watched me from the door. he had a six foot six flunky that he wanted to use on me. meanwhile the floor show had begun. you nudged yourself closer to see how the manager would react. I was ready for anything. I loosened my tie. at that point the leader of a leftist organization arrived and sat at an opposite table. the manager whispered something to the flunky. they both laughed. then the doors blew open; hundreds of peasants flowed in. the music stopped. everyone was robbed. they took the watch I planned to give you tomorrow morning. they handed out leaflets. they called us pigs. the army arrived too late. you had disappeared. a soldier carried your face in his wallet.
ghosts of ardennes rise from the mist &amp; fill the highway where your foot is slippery against the gas  riding to Li&egrave;ge cows at their business bow a hundred heads a town named for the church  l'&eacute;glise  reads &ldquo;legalise&rdquo; the man in the orange suit along the road is bald &amp; fat a little tuft of white hair &amp; looking miserable in this wet air mist turns to fog  road turns to Li&egrave;ge cows turn to crows with just a single  (the poem becomes a poem of turnings) every 5 kilometers another poem cut trunks of trees along the roadside over the air, a military air &amp; on the ground, uprooted trees: a hillside bare of trees  what color is that tree?  the season's color &ldquo;good morning, ladies all&rdquo; the English voices sing recordings from old gramophones millennia ago near Tilff we find old sun emerging colors stirring in the trees Dark Brick Belgium a town called Stein a saint called Geertruid Holland in the sun along the Maas (called
When the clock, like a moon, shows the dark side of its face, we reach across cold expanses of pillow for speech. In that silence, a fox barks from the next field, or a train drags its long syllable over a hill, or the baby, washed up again from sleep, sends its vowels calling for their lost consonants.
From the derelict garden creeps the cat; And spirits; and thoughts. Wild all. During the day the garden had stood back A place to walk past, street-sober, Unremarkable. How has it held what for so long I have not thought of This shadow that surrounds nowhere I have seen? Why does this place I have never set foot in and shall not Ooze out on the night air something of what I have been? Traveller, you think you have gone far. You have learnt to pack, travel light, full of expertise To hold to the road, to be lucky, avoid plague towns; And one dusk you may, inadvertent, pass a place, a bit of air And from it will seize You in the gut the feral eye-beam of the animal, Old thoughts you thought swallowed and passed; And the spirits, for some time shrunk and tamed, once again Wild all.
To the house on the grassy hill where rams rub their horns against the porch and your bare feet on the floors of silence speak in rhymed stanzas to the furniture, solemn chests of drawers and heavy chairs blinking in the sun you have let in! Before I enter the rooms of your solitude in my living form, trailing my shadow, I shall have come unseen. Upstairs and down with you and out across road and rocks to the river to drink the cold spray. You will believe a bird flew by the window, a wandering bee buzzed in the hallway, a wind rippled the bronze grasses. Or will you know who it is?
Yet in the end, defeated too, worn out and ready to fall, Hangs from the drowsy tree with cramped and desperate stem above the ditch the last leaf of all. There is something to be learned, I guess, from looking at the dead leaves under the living tree; Something to be set to a lusty tune and learned and sung, it well might be; Something to be learned though I was ever a ten-o'clock scholar at this school  Even perhaps by me. But my heart goes out to the oak-leaves that are the last to sigh &ldquo;Enough,&rdquo; and loose their hold; They have boasted to the nudging frost and to the two-and-thirty winds that they would never die, Never even grow old. (These are those russet leaves that cling All winter, even into the spring, To the dormant bough, in the wood knee-deep in snow the only coloured thing.)
<> Age and his oxen, groaning with their load, Pass creakingly: the ever-urging goad Of want compelling to what unknown end? What though the fields around be ploughed and sowed; The orchards burdened till they break and bend, Meagre for him the harvest God will send, And what he reaps haply he may not spend. What eyes are sadder than the eyes of Age! That have but labor for their heritage, And loneliness and loss for toil's long wage; That by the rushlight Faith still try to read Their Book of Patience, dimly, page by page, But find no comfort there that helps their need, But weariness ever; nothing sweet to feed Heart's hope upon, or any love to lead. I often think that if God could behold The sadness here of all Earth's poor and old, He would not sit so calm as we are told: If He could hear the souls that pray in vain, The hearts that perish, crying in the cold, And of bereavement all the wailing train, His hand would hush the archangelic strain, And Heaven sit bowed with pity for Earth's pain.
Are you shaken, are you stirred  By a whisper of love, Spellbound to a word  Does Time cease to move, Till her calm grey eye  Expands to a sky And the clouds of her hair  Like storms go by? Then the lips that you have kissed  Turn to frost and fire, And a white-steaming mist  Obscures desire: So back to their birth  Fade water, air, earth, And the First Power moves  Over void and dearth. Is that Love? no, but Death,  A passion, a shout, The deep in-breath,  The breath roaring out, And once that is flown,  You must lie alone, Without hope, without life,  Poor flesh, sad bone.
as one who(having written late)sees his light silenced. and going to his window a little while he watches the inevitable city's reborn enormous whisperless Body (and sees over &amp; between the roofs the lifted streets un- speak. -ing and he does not speak.)But perhaps inhaling a possible.cigarette he is sorry and pitiful.and he quietly repeats to himself something peculiar and small and dead And goes to sleep miserable &amp; tall.  so,my lady is your lover when he a little closes his eyes thinking &ldquo;tonight i did not lie in her bed.&rdquo; and the Light The tall extraordinary.Light,It goes rapidly over the perhaps world(over the possible Now &amp; the lilies.over Whoever &amp; me?) nouns and violets! ships,&amp;countries
I see his face pressed to the wind's pane, Staring with cold eyes: a country face Without beauty, yet with the land's trace Of sadness, badness, madness. I knew when I first saw him that was the man To turn the mind on, letting its beam Discover rottenness at the seams Of the light's garment I found him in. Did I look long enough or too long? On the weak brow nature's ruthless course Was charted, but the lips&rsquo; thin song Never reached me; rain's decrepit hearse <> <>
my son I promised you a world and see it is all gone it is beyond repairing we must learn to live without it each day a parade of soldiers goes past followed by dogs whose clinking tags proclaim they have owners and they are not mad we are told not to look up or down the sky is not public the earth is not ours we are told to look straight ahead and march forward and kill that is the way it is done in this land my son I love you and having told you all I remember all that is left of an old story I tell you that those who use the language of poets are poets and those who use the language of thieves are thieves
<> Out of your many faces Flash memories to me Now at the day end Away from the sidewalks Where your shoe soles traveled And your voices rose and blent To form the city's afternoon roar Hindering an old silence. Passers-by, I remember lean ones among you, Throats in the clutch of a hope, Lips written over with strivings, Mouths that kiss only for love, Records of great wishes slept with, Held long And prayed and toiled for: Yes, Written on Your mouths And your throats I read them When you passed by.
Tall, bleak, austere, the mighty buildings loom;  Hard, bare and dull the grimy city street. Here by the church is found a little room  Roofed with blue sky and with green turf made sweet. Surely the Master of this house would smile  Seeing the children on His grass at play, Seeing the mothers rest a little while  Out of the turmoil of the busy day. Soon will he ask, &ldquo;Where are the children gone:  They who should share this pleasant, sacred place? No little feet are treading this soft lawn,  Here shines no glory from a little face.&rdquo; Ye in whose trust this Christian church is left,  Think ye that thus ye serve your Master mild? None by His will are of this home bereft;  They love Him not who wrong a little child.
There's not enough air in the sky for his lungs to gulp A full draught that would quench the heat in his blood. His heart is about to pound apart and his legs Are flogged slaves from a conquered country. They've trodden the ground till they're numb. He has run all morning and run while the sun in the heavens Lurched to the top of its climb and hung, unmoving All that long noon, spreading the drone of its heat And all that while his dogged feet Ran on in the dust, and ran Past gates that opened and doors that tilted ajar On quiet rooms and gardens where fountains sighed And languorous women as the light streamed from their hair Looked up with secretive smiles that said &lsquo;At last you've arrived here,&rsquo; Yet still he plods on though behind him his shadow grows longer And the shadows of trees are meshed with their boughs and their trunks. That unending road he treads in a narrow passage  By night will he know that the path he follows Is the earth's wheel, spinning and spinning?
They come forth with all four legs folded in like a dimestore card table. Their hides are watered silk. As in blindman's buff they rise, unable to know except by touch, and begin to root from side to side in search of milk. The stanchions hang empty. Straw beds the planks that day. On that day they are left at will to nuzzle and malinger under the umbrella of their mothers' flanks sucking from those four fingers they were called forth to fill. Immediately thereafter each is penned narrowly and well, like a Strasbourg goose. Milk comes on schedule in a nippled pail. It is never enough to set them loose from that birthday dividend of touch. Bleating racks the jail. Across the barn the freshened cows answer until they forget who is there. Morning and night, machinery empties their udders. Grazing allows them to refill. The hungry calves bawl and doze sucking air. The sponges of their muzzles pucker and grow wet with nursing dreams. In ten weeks' time the knacker  the local slaughterer will back his truck against the ramp, and prodded to extremes they will kick and buck and enter and in our time they will come forth for good dead center wrapped and labeled in a plastic sheet, their perfect flesh unstreaked with blood or muscle, and we will eat.
We say good night in New Zealand, meaning you have to drive home to your place by the sea, sleep to surf like a heartbeat. And we must go home to America, face smog and sniper fire  and anger so much anger on faces, even those we have loved, yet it is hoped I shall never forget the little bird fenced in his acre of forest  nearly the last of his kind, green flecked with blue, red beak and red legs. In Fjordland for millions of years, walled by mountains a mile high. Though flightless his millions did well till men came, brought the stoat and the cat, the rifle and rat. And themselves. Now the rare bird is fenced to live out his days. I got down on my knees, bent close to the wires to hear what he said. He stood on one leg, the other curled up to his wing flat and useless. A moan came from his throat  little moan as he watched me  all his grief for those gone, their bright feathers, their deep double call through the rain- forest leaves. And I looked in his eyes, saw he grieved for us all. Yes, he grieved for us all.
Room might shape up at last: millstone on a bucket and the Virginia Quarterly Review on the millstone and the mirror through the screendoor across the street throwing our lives right back: an act of reflection from where the widow with blued hair watches, watches our family grow (sweet faces) (framed in leaf) we watchers face each other across macadam at dusk glass sums up a kind of lily pond for ceramic lilies and birch bricabrac, the shadow of a crane is nothing more than screendoor and yet in it's a little cloud and darkness, dusk, and trees that muted light when we bathed in our lost frog pond the forest for curtains, close them
Gentlemen, as we take our seats In the darkened house, let us rehearse The properties of the Western Theater; Attention: this is item one, Cloth of the Sun and Moon; it is The Firmament, see how it glitters  Life beyond life on earth, and Beautiful. It has been praised, Many regret to close their eyes Upon it, the eternal skyscape Which seems to wake at morning, To burn at noon and to unveil A silver mask at night. We do not Hear it and yet its changes are The Music of the Spheres  so much for that. What of the others? plant life, Animal life, the earthly spirits? Item: a Lock of Gilded Hair From the Head of Venus, a Tree Of Poisoned Apples, a Yellow Snake, A Hebrew Maiden and a Naked Man  We need not name them, they Have walked out of the sight Of God; they share our dark- Ness. Here is a White Hot Caldron for the Jew, a Chain Of Dragons and Hell's Mouth, And St. Sebastian with a weeping Eye tears? Four Glassy Tears, Four Kingly Crowns: Russia, France, Germany, Spain, a Wreath Of Smoke, all painted on a curtain; Behind the curtain, the West Wind, And in the Wind, Three Cries of Beggars, The Halt, the Maimed, the Blind. Gentlemen, this is our Gold, our Inheritance even the Gibbet, The Mask of Folly and the Stake, The Fall from Grace, the Earthly Power  We cannot sell it, and though No actors come, we shall wear it As tapestry is worn. It is our Europe To warm us in the cave, protect Us from heat on the rocks, from Dark, from flood, from moving mountains Among ice, the fire of lightning, The drifting wilderness of snow.
Beneath the tawny port of a warm sundown Clouds in the masts take on the structures Exemplified by space of a woman's bones Calm lies the Sound under Venus rising Orange goings down of great suns prelude The light in which a flying fish catches them Nights of the ocean in which your shrouding's Caught as if it were in its own reflection His cruise having lasted all this long while There are the summer night's Scarlatti On the quarter deck under Pacific stars And skins coming aboard in slim canoes A coat of otter fit for a mandarin In exchange for fishhooks and teapot lids
My child is like a bird's wing, a bird's wing, a bird's wing. Slender like a bird's wing, curving like a bird's wing. Her bones like those that leap and fling, And make the quick bird's wing, An elegant And slender Fairy-fashionplate design, Plumed like a bird's wing, steel strong, but very tender, Every curve of life to render. And her motion, like a bird's wing, cutting higher, She spreads above my sky, A noble, an immortal thing, A ph&oelig;nix-wing of fire. She spreads above my sky An aurora and a sign, An elegant and slender fairy-fashionplate design. And then we are timid, And infinitely small, Two children playing house In a pine tree tall. Or she is then a wren's wing Hiding a small-boy wren, Or I am hidden like a hope, tied with a cob-web rope, Beneath a humming bird's wing, a bird's wing, a bird's wing, And then she is an eagle's wing, a hawk's wing, a Greek god's wing, Teaching me, her son, to fly where tremendous stars sing. But I have never gone through clouds that hide her everywhere, Have only seen one wing emerge from fog or sea or cloudy air, Her eyes, Like the fixed eyes On the butterfly's or pheasant's wing. I have never seen her young soul's face, Her hidden eyes, and the other wing, I have never heard the word of grace My hawk will cry, my swallow sing. I have only seen the left wing, One fair, emerging bird's wing. My child is like a bird's wing, a bird's wing, a bird's wing, A dreamy wing, a lone wing.
This path is silky with dust where a lizard balances across bracken fronds and a brown butterfly opens wide to the stroke of the sun, where a trawler feels its way along the sandbanks and two yachts, helplessly paired, tack far out like the butterflies which have separated and gone quiet. A wild damson tree bulges with wasps among heaps that are not worth picking, and there a branch splits white with the lightning of too heavy a harvest. The lizard is gone in a blink. Its two-pronged tail half withered, half growing  flicks out of the sun. For a moment the pulse in its throat keeps the grass moving. A grass-bound offering of yarrow, rosebay willow herb and veined convolvulus lies to one side of the path as if someone's coming back. Instead, the sift of the dust  beneath the bracken these hills are full of adders.
When the glazier manoeuvres his rectangle of glass across the street like a slice of frozen lake, I think of you; when small flocks, roaming open fields in autumn like freed cyclamen, on wings as thin as nasal blood-vessels, sing as they fly, I think of you; and when I read that Beethoven's mother, cooking pastries in the back streets of Cologne, &lsquo;lulls his overwrought feelings into tranquillity&rsquo;, of course I think I'm Beethoven, with you.
This  Saith 'twas the worthiest of editors. Its mind was made up in &ldquo;the seventies,&rdquo; Nor hath it ever since changed that concoction. It works to represent that school of thought Which brought the hair-cloth chair to such perfection, Nor will the horrid threats of Bernard Shaw Shake up the stagnant pool of its convictions; Nay, should the deathless voice of all the world Speak once again for its sole stimulation, 'Twould not move it one jot from left to right. Come Beauty barefoot from the Cyclades, She'd find a model for St. Anthony In this thing's sure
The adults are getting desperate. Your mother the Proustian scholar is too exhausted to spell  Dad's face has turned into a twitch. Please, what are you trying to tell us? What good does it do to scream all night? You little red yowl, would you forgive us if we three, your mother and father and me piled into the car, blasted the radio loud as it goes, barreled out of town without you? Here's my trump card: swaddle you tight as a basketball, strap you into your windup swing, set you rocking like a metronome. You gape at the light the way an old geezer stares at his hands. Maybe your last life in Newark, New Jersey, retired you to a greasy armchair where you slouched down, smoked cheroots, and cursed God. Is there something you'd like to forget?
Into the dark tunnel from the white hills the train slows, almost stops. Across the aisle a man cups his eyes against the dark window. I do the same. Peer. Ice. Heavy, almost marble, solid, almost alive ice. Cracking and rumbling on the roof. But we are regular travellers and we are used to such warnings in the dark tunnel under the white and constant hills the train slows, almost stops, then begins to go faster as the ice is gone at the end of resistance we rush into darkness like a van speeding from a fenced-in printworks, like a fenced-in bus speeding from a pit.
She had looked in the crib to see a brown recluse pulsing on her baby's forehead. One of the cross staves supporting the coffin broke, so that it plunged forward, splintering open. Between Calvary Baptist Church Parsonage and the grave- yard, the reverend's planking addressed a muddy washout and the women in their meeting clothes walked over this now single file, their heads tilted down. He arrived of an evening in a suit covered with road. Rags hung burning in a corner, for the mosquitoes were bad. She let go a kettle of hot water, smoothed calico skirt to the backs of her knees. Hilo, Dusty, she answered.
-ing homunculus metals chambers tinfoiling exclusions like humidicribs wheeling slick asphalt deletions and stripping film, dust water licking axminster carpet spreadsheets what shows in the headlights or pinheaded spotlight? Crunch. Synthetic victims. And the frogs croak politely in their ditches. HALT! Good year wet weather halts the death of a zebra just outside a butcher's shop. Can't read the signs good who gives a damn anyway? Needed, inquire within: good management and sensible market indicators. Those who leave anything up to description need not remote opinions. Morality stinks, we keep it in buckets.
Long volleys of wind and of rain, And the rain on the drizzled pane,  And the day ends chill and murk; But on yesterday's eve, I trow, The new-moon's thorn-thin bow Stabbed rosy through gold and through glow,  Like a rich, barbaric dirk. The throats of the snapdragons,  Cool-colored with gold like the dawns  That come with spring o'er the hills,  Are filled with a sweet rain, fine, Of starry, scintillant shine, A faery vat of thin wine,  That the rain for the elfins fills. Dabbled the poppies shrink, And the coxcomb and the pink;  And the candytuft's damp crown Droops, dribbled, low bowed i' the wet; And rows of the mignonette Little musk-sacks open set,  Which the weight o' the dew drags down. Stretched taunt 'twixt the blades of grass, A gossamer-fibered glass,  That the garden-spider spun, The web, where the round rain clings In the sag o' its middle, swings  A hammock for elfin things  When the stars succeed the sun. And, mark, where the pale gourd grows As high as the climbing rose,  How the tiger-moth is pressed To that wide leaf's under side.  And I know where the red wasps hide, And the brown bees, that defied  The first strong gusts, distressed. Yet I feel that the gray will blow Aside for an afterglow;  And the wind, on a sudden, toss Drenched boughs; a pattering shower Athwart the red dusk in a glower, Big drops heard hard on each flower,  The grass and the flowering moss. And then for a minute, may be,  A pearl, hollow-worn, of the sea,   A glimmer of moon will smile, And a star, rinsed clean, through the dusk: And a freshness of moonlit musk O'er the showery lawns blow brusque  As spice from an Indian Isle.
Ho, everyone that thirsteth  And hath the price to give, Come to the stolen waters,  Drink and your soul shall live. Come to the stolen waters,  And leap the guarded pale, And pull the flower in season  Before desire shall fail. It shall not last for ever,  No more than earth and skies; But he that drinks in season  Shall live before he dies. June suns, you cannot store them  To warm the winter's cold, The lad that hopes for heaven  Shall fill his mouth with mould.
of the bigbutt lady holding and being there being there all of us, loving each other we play these sincerities, evening now, we show off, cut the fool early evening early sun-ra too, a nigger, we love for all the corny shit we see or have put on us, can you understand these dribble dee bibble dees these warm street shoobies my soul gets off behind
The troubled entrepreneurs of evening  the palm readers, the Mexican bracelet salesmen, the girl who dances on a sheet of tin  call out to me, turning for one second their voices into instruments of love and attention, promising love and attention, the Grail of whatever singular prize I have longed for and now found. I honor them all, as I honor the priests and the women who scream at the rain, as I honor the envelope of bills and silver change the boss hands me on Saturdays saying  to a pure absolution, gained like a handful of grain from the lords by obedience, so that if I lie all day Sunday like an effigy of myself, harmless on the bed, listening to the rants and vows rising from the street, it is not because I consider myself grandee of a greater enterprise, but a child who listens at the door of his parents' room, spellbound by the explanations they offer each other of why the world moves like a brutish uncle, drunk, through the house. It is a tone I listen for, an inflection, the moment when the argument breaks down because someone can't take it anymore.
These fields can never be simply themselves. Their green seems such a tender green, their contours so significant to the tourists who stare towards the far range of mountains as if they are listening to the page of history tearing or to what they know themselves of warfare between brothers. In this scenery cows and cannons stand side by side and motionless, as if they had grown here. The cannons on their simple wheels resemble farm carts, children climb them. Thus function disappears almost entirely into form, and what is left under the impartial blue of the sky is a landscape where dandelions lie in the tall grass like so many spent cartridges, turning at last to the smoke of puffballs; where the only red visible comes at sunset; where the earth has grown so lovely it seems to forgive us even as we are learning to forgive ourselves.
Cymbals and drums and flutes, hackle and flag, full fig, khaki, jungle greens, surplice and mitre, all the silks ten shades darker from the drench. They took the line of the stone row down to the stone ring: find the cairn and you've found the tomb of the unknown warrior. Then the whole caboodle formed ranks of three, caps off out in the middle in a half-gale, the moor piling itself on to itself, the sky closing like a lid. One stepped forward with a wreath, one with the chrism, and they saw it: the top thrown over as if he'd gone out in the bald weather still holding the usual bric-a-brac and a handful of corn, never good, never dead, just boss-eyed on one of the medic's locally-grown narcotics.
This mulberry tree Leaning at the spring Where you said, meet me? Its fruit tastes of sin. I stood there trembling An eternity, Or what resembled An eternity. Tree, fruit and cool spring, That entire place, Paled, paled to nothing, Then just the big face Fronting that lion Bloody from a kill, And smelling human Flesh, made wilder still. Pyramus, I swear I ran faster than You, into a cave. It fell from my hand ... I would have turned back For that crucial shawl Risking my own neck, Than you find it mauled And, thinking me dead From all that fresh blood And fabric in shreds, Run, run yourself through! Death's the wall between Us now; the wall seen From, none can see Unless death agrees. How fast you scaled that! Who's to win this race? You, for your swift death Sure I was savaged? Or me seeing this: You, all warm, bloody, And knowing the gist Of it's you loved me? Your wet blade's sweet tip Is hardly in me; Already the fruit Turn red on the tree.
I've got a system A system a system I've got a system And everyone's going to fit in The white folk the black folk The brown folk the yellow folk The men folk the women folk Yes everyone's going to fit in And if you don't fit my system My system my system If you don't fit my system There's something the matter with you You'll be locked up in a hospital Hospital hospital Locked up in a hospital With thousands of others like you Locked up with the misfits Misfits misfits Locked up with the misfits You're going to be there till you die But I'll be out in the system The system the system Working within the system Having the time of my life
All night the wind sings like a surf Filling our windows with the flailing hailstorm. The fearful prisoner lies bound In blankets and bodily sleep: Morning will come, the wind will die away, and he will see, What argosies lie drawn and quartered, on the sand and boulders Of his Tierra del Fuego: What cargoes foundered off the Greenland of his icy dream, His Labradors of greed and grief. How many men have rock and flood undone, Who never tried to cry, in the welter of the deadly weather: &ldquo;Oh save us, in the dark tornadoes of Genesareth!&rdquo; But see, how through the waterthrash of surf and reef The mind fights homeward to the beach, Works loose, half dead, from the huge seas, And lets its poor, mute mask be lifted to the light, So sleep can leak away, and leave the water-dazzled eyes To wake and wonder! For morning works a miracle of sun and silence, And light drowns in the trees.
The road is a hard road, and the river is wadded and flattened out Due west of Santa Maria dell'Ortolo. Each morning I drove with its steady breathing right to my right, Dawn like a courtier With his high white hat just coming into the room, Ponte Pietra cut in the morning gauze, Catullus off to my left Released in the labials of the sunlight, Fire on the water, daylight striking its match Wherever it pleased Along the Adige and stitched cross-tiles of San Fermo ... What do I do with all this? Phlegethon He must have crossed, Dante, I mean, His cloak like a net as he glided and stepped over the stones. I hurry on by, breakfast In mind, and the day's duty, half-left at the  Our outfit was out in town, in hiding, spiked fence and three Chevrolets In front when I pulled up for roll call And the morning mail and settling in, DiCenzo signed out for Udine, and Joe for Vienna. All day the river burned by my desk as I sailed my boats down its licks for a foot or so.
<> And the whirl of cities is a dream that is lost; I shall not light a fire, nor at the window Watch the golden starlight of the frost. I shall wander through the deep, frozen dusk Like a shadow through a mirror's intricacies; I shall gaze on the porcelain leaves of rime, The silver rime glimmering on the trees. The wind will be full of silver needles, The wind will be a keen and glittering rain, I shall wander through the deep, frozen dusk And my face shall glow with the stars of pain. And there will come a crying in me, And the whole grey world will peal and cry; I know that the heavens will swing above, And silver hoarfrost bells sweep by. The dusk will be hung with the silver mists Of a mute oblivion, and I shall go Far where dark silence calls on great white hills Over the blue wastes of silver snow....
For security against robbers who snatch purses, rifle luggage, and crack safes, One must fasten all property with ropes, lock it up with locks, bolt it with bolts. This (for property owners) is elementary good sense. But when a strong thief comes along he picks up the whole lot, Puts it on his back, and goes on his way with only one fear: That ropes, locks, and bolts may give way. Thus what the world calls good business is only a way To gather up the loot, pack it, make it secure In one convenient toad for the more enterprising thieves. Who is there, among those called smart, Who does not spend his time amassing loot For a bigger robber than himself? In the land of Khi, from village to village, You could hear cocks crowing, dogs barking. Fishermen cast their nets, Ploughmen ploughed the wide fields, Everything was neatly marked out By boundary lines. For five hundred square miles There were temples for ancestors, altars For field-gods and corn-spirits. Every canton, country, and district Was run according to the laws and statutes  Until one morning the Attorney General, Tien Khang Tzu, Did away with the King and took over the whole state. Was he content to steal the land? No, He also took over the laws and statutes at the same time, And all the lawyers with them, not to mention the police. They all formed part of the same package. Of course, people called Khang Tzu a robber, But they left him alone To live as happy as the Patriarchs. No small state would say a word against him, No large state would make a move in his direction, So for twelve generations the state of Khi Belonged to his family. No one interferred With his inalienable rights. The invention Of weights and measures Makes robbery easier. Signing contracts, settings seals, Makes robbery more sure. Teaching love and duty Provides a fitting language With which to prove that robbery Is really for the general good. A poor man must swing For stealing a belt buckle But if a rich man steals a whole state He is acclaimed As statesman of the year. Hence if you want to hear the very best speeches On love, duty, justice, etc., Listen to statesmen. But when the creek dries up Nothing grows in the valley. When the mound is levelled The hollow next to it is filled. And when the statesmen and lawyers And preachers of duty disappear There are no more robberies either And the world is at peace. Moral: the more you pile up ethical principles And duties and obligations To bring everyone in line The more you gather loot For a thief like Khang. By ethical argument And moral principle The greatest crimes are eventually shown To have been necessary, and, in fact, A signal benefit To mankind.
That the  a lesson in survival for Mankind. Around the time Charles Darwin had declined the dedication of  its predators could spot it on the soot, but Industrial Revolution and Evolution taught the moth to black its wings and not get caught where all of Nature perished, or all but. When lichens lighten some old smoke-grimed trees and such as Yorkshire's millstacks now don't burn and fish nose waters stagnant centuries, can  if Man's awakened consciousness succeeds in turning all these tides of blackness back and diminishing the need for looking black, to flutter white again above new Leeds?
For a Voice like a star. Shining. With points to pierce space, and be simple, superb clarity. Incandescent. Some thing a child might carry down the black hall, to make peace with Mystery. Or woman into a wooded place where she may see the shapes and names of trees. Anonymous awe be called Glory. Or man might seek in the cave of a woman and see the writing on the wall, and find some luminosity. Ancestors may descend on streams of light. Or all look up and listen deep into the night. The wild and civilized Sky.
You would think with so much going on outside The deal table would make for the window, The ranged crockery freak and wail Remembering its dark origins, the frail Oil-cloth, in a fury of recognitions, Disperse in a thousand directions And the simple bulb in the ceiling, honed By death to a worm of pain, to a hair Of heat, to a light snowflake laid On a dark river at night and wearied Above all by the life-price of time And the failure by only a few tenths Of an inch but completely and for ever Of the ends of a carefully drawn equator To meet, sing and be one abruptly Roar into the floor.     But it Never happens like that. Instead There is this quivering silence In which, day by day, the play Of light and shadow (shadow mostly) Repeats itself, though never exactly. This is the all-purpose bed-, work- andbedroom. Its knuckles doorknobs only lighter, Its occasional cries of despair A function of the furniture.
The city man got dust on his shoes and carried a box of dirt back to his apartment. He joined the killers in jail and saw things their way. He visited the scene of the crime and backed people against the wall with his typewriter and watched them squirm. He saw how it was. And they they saw how it was: he was a young man who had wandered onto the farm and begun to badger the homefolk. So they told him stories for weeks while he fermented the facts in his little notebook. Now the wide country has gone sober again. The river talks all through the night, proving its gravel. The valley climbs back into its hammock below the mountains and becomes again only what it is: night lights on farms make little blue domes above them, bright pools for the stars; again people can visit each other, talk easily, deal with real killers only when they come.
When snows begin to fill the park, It is not hard to keep the eyes Secure against the flickering dark, Aware of summer ghosts that rise. The blistered trellis seems to move The memory toward root and rose, The empty fountain fills the air With spray that spangled women's hair; And men who walk this park in love May bide the time of falling snows. The trees recall their greatness now; They were not always vague and bowed With loads that build the slender bough Till branches bear a tasteless fruit. A month ago they rose and bore Fleshes of berry, leaf, and shade: How painlessly a man recalls The stain of green on crooked walls, The summer never known before, The garden heaped to bloom and fade. Beyond the holly bush and path The city lies to meet the night, And also there the quiet earth Relies upon the lost delight To rise again and fill the dark With waterfalls and swallows' sound. Beyond the city's lazy fume, The sea repeats the fall of spume, And gulls remember cries they made When lovers fed them off the ground. But lonely underneath a heap Of overcoat and crusted ice, A man goes by, and looks for sleep. The spring of everlastingness. Nothing about his face revives A longing to evade the cold. The night returns to keep him old, And why should he, the lost and lulled, Pray for the night of vanished lives, The day of girls blown green and gold?
I know the stars by their names, Aldebaran, Altair, And I know the path they take Up heaven's broad blue stair. I know the secrets of men By the look of their eyes, Their gray thoughts, their strange thoughts Have made me sad and wise. But your eyes are dark to me Though they seem to call and call  I cannot tell if you love me Or do not love me at all. I know many things, But the years come and go, I shall die not knowing The thing I long to know.
When days open and air softens And sun spills over the sides of hills That had lain in shade, Shall body and heart resist? What else was winter But a grindstone against which they were set? Sparks rushed, brittle and heatless, Against unfeeling hands. The axe was lifted away, made sharply bright. Now the birds' undertone In the morning, Delighted, sensual, pure  What is this but the body's ease, Waking satisfied And grateful for its dream?
Top to bottom of a skin white wall Some thin vine blossom bleeds, the sun Indolently erodes the sill. Blood can run cold in this hot town. And the blue sky bends a very smooth look And the water keeps malignant calm And the itchy mouth the Canal has makes Lips to compress their ocean's arm. Fat with colour the day commands Holstered, blazing boss of the street. Time daren't stir, nor the four winds. Death is detained, but won't be late. Cool off at El Tropico; fans, Cans, fans and a glassful which Can't go bad like the barrow man's Bag of oranges while you watch. Polyglot, polychrome droop or blow Lush hybrids of the dollar shallows. Nylon blooms and rags in a row, Negress purples, negress yellows Shame without strutting step or breast Pale casual trash two hours ashore; From bodily darkness have digressed By a flowery shift of skins, no more. Now continents and oceans lie Farther than planets, and the scarlet Or bruise-blue petals kiss your knee, Romancing in an isthmian twilight Of temperate islands. The Zone Troops Strike MacArthurian attitudes. Avid the traveller slums the shops, Tickling a vein which no blood leads That street where one was knifed last night. Home and aboard is where to be, With a mast-high moon, eyes crackling bright. The Caribbean's the next sea.
Not the delicate mare who came nosing. Not the dustdim ironeyed gelding. This was the one. The bright dancer who would not approach the fence. Set in one side of his snowbright face was the blank blue stare of the sky. And there in the other, a hazel tunnel. A swirling of greens and browns that could see. The hooves were pink as tea-roses, streaked with the pale of oystershell. This was the great horse I wanted. And this was the one for sale! I wanted to try him alone. How many moons has the sky? You insisted my friend ride him too. And he didn't know how. Didn't know. My hands crossed the brilliant silk of his neck as the lips of a prince cross the princess. Who sleeps in forever. Who wakes in the world. He woke to my touch and we raced the proud wind over grass. Over bushes and ditches. This was the one, the one my dreams woke to. Wide-eyed. But my friend, I could feel him slipping. Feel him falling back into the grass, as I reached, too late, for his hand. As my hand reached backward into the blur of his wide white face and the grass. He was gone. By the time I could turn I had heard your voice in my heart. <> Father once a son, son become a father, you riding now the white stallion of your bones! It is true that I fell from the horse as your son. That I rode on. Am still riding.
It's not like waiting for post. This is how you wait for the one letter you need: soft stuff bound with tape and paste. Inside a little word. That's all. Happiness. Waiting for happiness? It's more like waiting for death. The soldiers will salute and three chunks of lead will slam into your chest. Your eyes will then flash red. No question of joy. Too old now, all bloom gone. Waiting for what else now but black muzzles in a square yard. A square letter. I think there may be spells in the ink. No hope. And no one is too old to face death or such a square envelope.
I saw the midlands  Revolve through her hair; The fields of autumn  Stretching bare, And sheep on the pasture  Tossed back in a scare. And still as ever  The world went round, My mouth on her pulsing  Throat was found, And my breast to her beating  Breast was bound. But my heart at the centre  Of all, in a swound Was still as a pivot,  As all the ground On its prowling orbit  Shifted round. And still in my nostrils  The scent of her flesh; And still my blind face  Sought her afresh; And still one pulse  Through the world did thresh. And the world all whirling Round in joy Like the dance of a dervish Did destroy My sense and reason Spun like a toy. But firm at the centre My heart was found; My own to her perfect Heartbeat bound, Like a magnet's keeper Closing the round.
He whose law is within himself Walks in hiddenness. His acts are not influenced By approval or disapproval. He whose law is outside himself Directs his will to what is Beyond his control And seeks To extend his power Over objects. He who walks in hiddenness Has light to guide him In all his acts. He who seeks to extend his control Is nothing but an operator. While he thinks he is Surpassing others, Others see him merely Straining, stretching, To stand on tiptoe. When he tries to extend his power Over objects, Those objects gain control Of him. He who is controlled by objects Loses possession of his inner self: If he no longer values himself, How can he value others? If he no longer values others, He is abandoned. He has nothing left! There is no deadlier weapon than the will! The sharpest sword Is not equal to it! There is no robber so dangerous As Nature (Yang and Yin). Yet it is not nature That does the damage: It is man's own will!
I smell upon this twisted blackbone tree the silk and white petal of my mother's youth. From her ear-rings three diamonds splash a handful of needles, and I see my mother run back from rain to the crying cradles. The rains tack and sew with broken thread the rags of the tree-tasselled light. But her hands are a wet eagle's two black pink-crinkled feet, one talon crippled in a garden- trap set for a mouse. Her sarees do not cling: they hang, loose feather of a onetime wing. My cold parchment tongue licks bark in the mouth when I see her four still sensible fingers slowly flex to pick a grain of rice from the kitchen floor.
&lsquo;Your eyes that once were never weary of mine Are bowed in sorrow under pendulous lids, Because our love is waning.&rsquo; And then she: &lsquo;Although our love is waning, let us stand By the lone border of the lake once more, Together in that hour of gentleness When the poor tired child, Passion, falls asleep: How far away the stars seem, and how far Is our first kiss, and ah, how old my heart!&rsquo; Pensive they paced along the faded leaves, While slowly he whose hand held hers replied: &lsquo;Passion has often worn our wandering hearts.&rsquo; The woods were round them, and the yellow leaves Fell like faint meteors in the gloom, and once A rabbit old and lame limped down the path; Autumn was over him: and now they stood On the lone border of the lake once more: Turning, he saw that she had thrust dead leaves Gathered in silence, dewy as her eyes, In bosom and hair. &lsquo;Ah, do not mourn,&rsquo; he said, &lsquo;That we are tired, for other loves await us; Hate on and love through unrepining hours. Before us lies eternity; our souls Are love, and a continual farewell.&rsquo;
Well, dearest one, I hope my heart Will stop its bitter sigh, Because it never more can share Thy glorious destiny; My love has never sought reward, 'Twas joy enough for me To dwell alone at certain times And cherish thoughts of thee. My mother to her child once gave Affection's untold wealth, Since then I've seen the swift decay Of hope, and joy, and health; I murmured not, at heaven's decree, Though thus of all bereft, When you and I began to love A world of bliss was left. Though other ties thy heart now bind While we but drift apart, Yet, am I sinning if I hide Thine image in my heart? So sweet, so holy was the spell By love around me cast That I am blinded to all love Since this, my charm, has past. I feel that you another love, Yet there's a heavy trace, And all the love of others Those bright tints can't efface. I hope his lot a joyous one If you his fate control, I'll try to seek a higher fate  The union of the soul. The time was, when I looked on thee As God sent future bride, And had a longing in my heart To thus be satisfied; But it is best for you and I If we are not to wed, To know before we go too far Upon the lover's tread. Farewell, beloved one, when thy brow The cupid crown shall bind, And when, somewhere in life's abode You and someone combine, Then think of one who looked on thee With more than human pride, And glories in the thought that you Are someone's rightful bride.
Quick! there's that low brief  Rubythroat is at the tigerlilies  only a passionate baby sucking breastmilk's so intent.  <> Emerson, a good dreamer. <> <> <> stays for a fractional sharp sweetness, and's gone, can't take more than that. The remaining tigerblossoms have rolled their petals all the way back, the stamens protrude entire, there are no more buds.
Into the choosing zone. I'll call it South-South-East. I am, and I am glad, a glint, a beast. When I lope from the Capital with a long list in my hand, some of you will be on it. I scan it on the orange sand and I stretch, like the long pig spotted and hunted. I admit it all, confess the thing, face the truth, want it, I have no choice and make the choice and, choosing these, get back where I started from. Nobody's.
Let me take this other glove off  As the  And the beauteous fields of Eden  Bask beneath the Abbey bells. Here, where England's statesmen lie, Listen to a lady's cry. Gracious Lord, oh bomb the Germans.  Spare their women for Thy Sake, And if that is not too easy  We will pardon Thy Mistake. But, gracious Lord, whate'er shall be, Don't let anyone bomb me. Keep our Empire undismembered  Guide our Forces by Thy Hand, Gallant blacks from far Jamaica,  Honduras and Togoland; Protect them Lord in all their fights, And, even more, protect the whites. Think of what our Nation stands for,  Books from Boots' and country lanes, Free speech, free passes, class distinction,  Democracy and proper drains. Lord, put beneath Thy special care One-eighty-nine Cadogan Square. Although dear Lord I am a sinner,  I have done no major crime; Now I'll come to Evening Service  Whensoever I have the time. So, Lord, reserve for me a crown, And do not let my shares go down. I will labour for Thy Kingdom,  Help our lads to win the war, Send white feathers to the cowards  Join the Women's Army Corps, Then wash the Steps around Thy Throne In the Eternal Safety Zone. Now I feel a little better,  What a treat to hear Thy Word, Where the bones of leading statesmen,  Have so often been interr'd. And now, dear Lord, I cannot wait Because I have a luncheon date.
Jumping out of the straw, jumping out of the straw, his cheeks alive with bristles, jumping out     you've got him! He'll ruin the lot of you, jumping out:   two drums   tied up in this jumping   and the joy and the jumping   bitchery of art, the men   with warm hard   hearts    out of the straw  Got him!    Alive with bristles, jumping with his cheeks out of the straw alive with bristles, his cheeks   ready to jump the cameraman's guitar, the guitarist's   camera;    alive with jumping out of the jumping out of the straw.
&ldquo;There is no Minotaur after all,&rdquo; he ended, and he paused in the blank square, &ldquo;now to wind up the spool.&rdquo; Why does he stare? his hair rise in the silence and the blade fall from his hero band weaker than a girl? &ldquo; in the labyrinthine heart. And everywhere. (So he begins.) O Theseus, recall your blood to you and oh, pick up the knife! At last, the second moment in your life  but the first was long ago, you have forgot  you have a rival worthy of Theseus. But softly, this is for the surgeon cut and grant yourself an hour's arm&egrave;d truce.
<> &lsquo;All's finished here. In the burrow memory falls away until There is nothing to cling on to.&rsquo; He digs for some image, for some route back To a time when company existed. He comes up with nothing. He watches how frost melts from the apples, Thinks how the world might be empty, thinks How old plagues might have settled. &lsquo;Once I breakfasted on roses, I gossiped with tulips, I invited friends home, Got them drunk on the brilliant petals! But then the clouds swarmed, They sucked up colour. All went. Blank poppies, small memories of redness. Little rags, without essence.&rsquo; He sniffs the mist to trace a scent, But there is no difference now Between enemy and flower. Daily his brain tightens. On the leaves he has written his messages; They darken then vanish. From the dandelions he has unhooked his longings; On the wind that changes pollen into dust They drift, then vanish. He sinks down the long burrow frightened. Brer Rabbit changes. He becomes the ants' banquet, A focal-point for the flies' reunion. Into the landscape his brown fur merges. Soon without fear or shape he will run Through tunnels of fern and campion, Down trackways that have for centuries led From door to green door Brer Rabbit will be flowing.
Eye-level with the alps of ash and slag I trawl my floor for a BT counterfoil deep into its scarlet monitory phase through shards and rags and scraps and rivelled gold tobacco threads and these long white hairs which must be mine alas as no one else would venture into this rented room except one short-haired black-haired cat. And here's a flea he carried on his back, a tiny emissary from the caliphat of bad dreams, doing vaults and back-flips onto three golden dusters, bought last year and still sealed in polythene, their hems blanket-stitched with crimson thread in a series of small &lsquo;v&rsquo;s overlapping the dictionary. Crimson: it burns a fuse the length of a dusty trail of roots back to Arabic: qirmizi: meaning the Scarlet Grain insect which breeds on the kermes oak stuff Solomon hung beneath the wrought-gold five-cubit wingspan of the cherubim ... crimson lights up back along the line of the trade-routes west, at each camel-stop or port a vowel-shift, a letter dislodged from the throat to the palate colouring the sound. My eyes lift to the level of the window, facing east onto brickwork, tarmac and slate tiles. Upon the window-sill a fly's black torso, deep in the mire of last year's dust, with its seraph wings still poised for flight but cumbersome like panes of leaded glass or paddles of cracked quartz, tired for a while of beating at the air.
There is no shame in this, I left one bush for another, one was smoking, one the flowers were dry and brown; I planted them in a hat and put them beside my bed; one bush was mostly wood, the flowers were red of course and the fruit, if that was fruit, was hanging down. I had to either kneel or bend half over to drink the spikes and when I set fire to it it was almost the end of winter, at least by the calendar, though I knew we could both still freeze. The shadow, it didn't have wings, it wasn't a voice, it didn't live unconsumed, but I still listened and also I watched. I can't say pity, I can't say fear either; I was enchanted can I say that, and use that word without reproach? I was enamored, and I kept coming back. I put my hand inside the leaves but I was burned and cut, my blood mixed with the fire; I was destroyed for a minute, some small bush, a thorn without much body, a jujube of sorts, had caught me and left me; and I walked back, as I always do, with a flushed face, mostly anger, and a drop of sadness in the eye. Regret took over after a minute, self-accusations, and even talking aloud to myself. Whatever city I live in, whatever steps I have to climb, and when I walk up a hillside, I am both enslaved and freed. I have reached a point where they are almost the same; it is a relief knowing that. As it was a relief finding the bush, though I was looking for something larger, either a woody astringent such as you bury your face in, such as the end of winter when the thaw comes suddenly blooms with yellow flowers; or a kind of palm with heavy cornstalks for a trunk and sticky gardenias for a blossom, not that jujube.
The perfume of flowers: a plane of air I walk into is lime or narcissus is as strong as lemon on the path. And in bed in the night the poison of desire the elixir pours into the season of me. Arouse, soul and body, as one. Arise, sleep: in one motion are all the terms. The notion there is anything dispersed is heresy. The charge does not change, the charge is to be found out, the state of change is the confusion, the wobble. The force comes through on a direct line, a nucleus is a cluster which seeks to cluster. The lustre of us is only what the poison gives off. Virid! virid! the green spring is poison. The flowers burn of it. I burn of it. The smoke I smell occurs as quick as that tanager just now landed on the pine, perfume in the air It is a bauble what the heart is, the sceptre!
No man is alone. Side by side in the long room we mingle and touch, Nudge at the table, Shout on the walks, Lie head to heel in the close beds. Even at stool we squat in our row: The private act revealed and made known to the corporate eye. Yet after a time the mind erects its own defenses. The tongue chatters, The mobile mouth smiles and flouts, In the steaming baths the nudists dance and wrestle with joy; But behind the bone wall The spirit whistles and sings to itself, Keeping its inward motion and its solitary grace While the bodies touch. But the body itself, Though it turns and cavorts, And schools forever to the avid throng, Does it not tire? Will it not also, Some subsequent day, Aware of stillness and a strange peace, Be glad to be wholly alone?
I am letting two old roses stand for everything I believe in. I am restricting the size of the world, keeping it inside that plastic pot. This is like Greece, the roses sitting in the hot sun, the leaves exhausted, the blue sky surrounding them. I reach my fingers inside the dirt and slowly scrape the sides. One more flower will bloom the rest of this month, probably symbolizing the last breath left after a lifetime of tearful singing. The wall in back of me is no part of this. It shows only a large shadow overcome with thought. It shows him in ruins, his body spread out in all directions, his pencil uprooted, his own orange roses dark and hidden.
<> Of the secret ways they would use him, Of the worried gardens, the old ruins where they would take him The pale girls who never blush at the jokes he tells them He dreams For how can he imagine them anything other than beautiful The young telephonists Tuned into cities Whose bodies receive and send out messages Who travel down the warm long wires To where something tender is being said How difficult not to answer The whispering voices The hurried confessions The first sentence broke at its centre The last question left unanswered How difficult to imagine The girl three months pregnant Who stumbling out her coded message Breaks down, asks Can you exterminate a generation? And how with one quick call Dreams can be aborted And birds dozing on the wires tainted  Through silence only the good messages go unheard Stopping though the wires continue  How can he imagine them Anything other than beautiful Those girls Whose heads are jammed with the city's secrets And yet how can he imagine Their own bodies' failures Or how easily they are lost and The long wires sing Of their own situations.
<> The old red setter and Joe, the retriever, Bess, Went out in the cider time for something to kill, Past Arthur's Camp, a couple of miles, I guess. We came in the noon of the blue September day To a tongue of grass thrust into a cleft of copse, Berries were black and plump on the changing spray, A dwindled spring went over its lip in drops. We stopped to drink at the spring, Hal, Walter and I, The retriever, Bess, the old red setter and Joe. A covey went up with a whirr and the guns let fly, The birds went skimming the trees towards Barney's Low. They fired two last long shots, the Rector and Bill, A feather came out of a bird, but the bird went on. &ldquo;Hit him,&rdquo; they said; we muttered, &ldquo;You didn't kill.&rdquo; Over the tips of the trees the covey was gone. The hit bird swerved from the line of the covey's charge, Over the grass of the field we watched him rise: &ldquo;Got him,&rdquo; the Rector said. &ldquo;Her towers,&rdquo; said Jarge. We saw him breast like a lark the hot blue skies. He climbed the air till he struggled in sky alone, Straining and beating up on a battling breast, Then paused, then dropped with a thump upon bounding bone: Joe brought him in; we bagged him up with the rest. At covey-call time in the dusk September eve, We loitered home together and shared the kill: Nine brace, three rabbits, a hare: we all took leave; Jarge took the dogs: the moon came over the hill. Poor Bess, the retriever, died, her muzzle all white; A run-away cart ran over the spaniel, Joe; Jarge died of a quart of rum next Christmas night: The old red setter went west, oh, ages ago. Bill died from shock of a fall, as his heart was weak, The Rector lingered to die of a sheer old age; Walter went down with a stroke and could not speak, He, too, has gathered his goods and drawn his wage. Only Hal and myself of the nine remain, And Hal's forgotten the bird, forgotten the shoot; The grass, the wood and the spring are here in my brain, With the dogs and the wine-leaved brambles black with fruit. I think of the towering bird with its choking lung, Its bursting heart, its struggle to scale the sky, And wonder when we shall all be tried and hung For the blue September crime when we made it die.
Glade sword, glint running. Tree shiver, choked cry. River shadow, full quiver.  Dust mounds, old wind.  Grave mounds, cold wind. Thatch fire, child running. Plunder cart, thousand ashes. Village rain, storm forest. Storm gods, rain ghosts. Restless fathers, prayer hearths. Jogging banners, thrones dissolving. Blood crop, dog pot.  Dust mounds, old wind.  Grave mounds, cold wind. Cracked stove, slow crumple. Moon blade, rolled skull. Blood brother, spangled ambush. Sun coins, bird calls. Bent bow, man running. Bent bow, body jumping. Bent bow, neck streaming. Bent bow, knees broken. Bent bow, breast nailed. Bent bow, bent bow. Bent bow, bent bow.  Dust mounds, old wind.  Grave mounds, cold winds.
The children have gone through doors so small we may not follow even if we stoop and the dogs bark all night hearing calls in registers too high for our frail senses. We follow words instead but they are only signposts leading to other words leaving us lost in our own landscape. We struggle merely to see for the sun too has slipped away, hiding its tracks in afterlight, to a place of unimagined reds and golds a place where children lounge on grass calling to dogs whose barking they can still hear all these years from home.
Coming back to my place my place coming into a place a place is what holds together the breath of it goes out and comes in the breath of it is always returning So I find back to a place to find what is mine what is coherent as a color is when it is a wave behaving a house behaving in time is that it a place without interruption And mine could be a tower held tight in air the insertion of one person in another a person in a place a summons answered the wind came first I have no right to the body I am To come back to no situation orphan house a child is the same something coming close to itself I knew the shape only of what it was to hold bodiless the liquid place to be alone is not the same I am not the same as myself only by losing that place found.
When you point your finger Oblivion stops short, surprised, and if you call The Future turns around and lies at your feet. Spring is nothing but One of your words. The moon is nothing But a memory of yours you left Hooked in the bramble sky. Beneath your heart there beats a Sweet and constant living clock: Time would fall apart If this should stop. Your step is fine and brief as if Caught on the ground each time by sighs Of sorry angels. When you go By there stay perfumes swim- ming in the air and talking about you! There's a divine delight, A flower of your soul, clearly declares The day you love, love will be made over Into something new! In your body of harmonies is Found all the geometry of heaven. In your soul Is met the music of God! If someone asks your origin, say It is from Him you come. To those who do not know your way Answer you go toward Thyself.
A man who fixed his eyes with longing on the sun might see the sun stand still while he himself was carried east on the turning earth swept blinded into night: so did I love some one once, like Copernicus. Stars are sweeping past me  I can fix my attention only on my sick body and that is not still either, I am upside down. They say that God is still  where? I am too stupid to understand it like Einstein. I made a golden disk like a Keltic relic that I saw in Dublin. I do not love it, it doesn't keep me warm, but I hide and stare at it and into it flat and impenetrable. It says, &ldquo;Your eyes are going blind, you have three teeth and cannot chew, often you are dizzy. Yet it is quiet here in our neolithic cave and you do love me although you glimpse I am a flat evil fetish.&rdquo; I love the English language. She has loved me. I used to stutter, fear stuck my voice inside my mouth  my rebel double fought with me she should speak. Now I say fearlessly what I didn't know I knew.
When ed u cat ed you lose your religion and when one is possessed by air of sweetgum or sorrell that has been cut, dripping into the stem and ever so down-home-sweet one is diminished: and when you call at mountains and your suggestion seems to widen from the top, the bottom like an endless resource a well fount glaring as if moonheavy or the thin- hastening to the need of prophet:and always the brooding source for sap running:there is only something like a last destruction and evident like a slow, gaunt bear nosing into the luminous headwaters and icy bed (true to instinct and natural) her body plummets into you, your eyes holding all for a blameless second Though there be death and locked heavens, chance is a great hymn: and if the dark flung folds break over you you'll move in that terrible loneliness
The sky, when all else fails, sometimes permits this: late afternoon sun going not only down but doubly brilliant, bulging rays solid as any blinding metal off the sea, and in it light you thought would not return, gathered plump as a trumpet-call from summer's and your own infancy, glints off the green-glazed, ringletted lamb your brother brings out: &ldquo;Remember this?&rdquo; salvaged from her last few effects. As it was, so is it still: the hollowed plaster thorax cavity that used to hold pencil nubs, clips, household bills by the fistfull... Open-eyed all those days and nights, it took in whole those years you stared holding your breath long past it and out the window into dimensionless home- sickness. In air, in space, in time and bone  a habitation: you would not call it home. Squinting more, seeing less, breath's vapor barely veiled that ceramic fleece; it faced everything there was to see inside and out the sky-framing windowpane; one of a host of dimestore knick-knacks seen daily while itself seeing nothing, not the golden neighborhood porches at noon nor the aluminum sidings at evening going pale. Even so, even as you know, have often imagined, the actual scene sometimes near irresistible: to stand at the high window of the house across the street, overlooking it all once more the steps taken, the street played in leaves you inert, entombed, still there is a light off a thing you look at sometimes will let you see it open with half an eye from childhood you know you have not seen the last of yet. . . . Though our cells are renewed every seven years, you're no one if not the one who was there all along. When all else fails, the sky sometimes permits this.
Dan, who adorn richly like dutchesses ladies with sleek furs in our northern snows  the sea lion that lay blotted on the floes, the mink that darted in the leafless trees: yet are not strong and heavy coats like these fitter for males, that have been the clothes of shepherds and woodsmen and made grandiose the stature of kings during solemnities? Then as I see on our not vivid street spare men among the falling flakes flit by, I think, Let Dan resume to glorify our knights with furs and make the city proud like those seaports whither came the Hansa fleet, Hamburg, Luebeck, and Nijni-novgorod.
You might go through my papers sometime, Years from now but in weather like this, An unexpected wind in June, the month In which we met, that now accepts No special pleas and simply shifts Stacks to the floor, to the corners that hold Love-letters and final demands. Leave the window wide open and go. You might hear from downstairs The counterpane of what I wrote Unmaking, remaking itself, still performing The paperweight tricks of the master. Let it light by chance Upon what I cannot imagine now, A natural disorder we could share.
A millionaire crooner of Westerns is our profile this evening cute dimples, cleft chin, notes the woman who interviews him, who asks if his good looks help in his trade. She feels his biceps, declares them impressive. He's used to such flirtations, fields such lust as hers in good humor. And he's not bad at strumming his guitar, mounting his horse like the Marlboro man. The resemblance to Elvis is noted, an asset for sure. He'll go far, already has for he was born to a vast holding, and his cattle roam far over Queensland. He's an Adonis with talent, only in his mid-twenties decades ahead of nothing but fame, success more than assured. He's got a contract in hand from America, tour overseas planned. He may star in films but at the moment wants to stay close to the land a few days at home and he's clean again. He loves the fresh air, horses, vast space. He's too good to be true, the awed mistress of this interview concludes. She envies, she says, his flawless skin, how does he do it? And his voice is not bad, he knows lots of songs. But before leaving off he wants to divulge another ambition to go into politics  &ldquo;to STOP IMMIGRATION.&rdquo; He says it with grit on his teeth. It's his obsession, a life mission. &ldquo;If that's what it takes, I'll do it,&rdquo; he vows. &ldquo;We should never give up our birthright. A man's land is his most precious possession.&rdquo; And he was born to a great deal of it indeed. Let's not mention Aboriginals, chased from that land. Nor consider the homeless, huddled in holds of creaking boats, touching inhospitable shores. Feed them to sharks, would suggest the political Marlboro man.
there's no honest barber in this town no house ready for daybreak or religion no band ready for its madness kling klang music the drummers bend &amp; strive riding on drums a double heart how strange, voluptuous never so steady for departure says the salad captain: come with me the lady opens her moutha moon balanced on tongue a tongue pushing through blossoms into the words  the light breaks: <> <> the messenger isn't the shipwreck: fallen day moves in around them <> who play games, situate the pronouns under our tongues
Today I had to force my cat, Pierrot Into the carrier To take him to the Vet. He fought so hard I nearly fell Holding him down, And when at last I managed to force His paws under the lid And closed it, I began to cry. His pride, His sense of himself, Noble cat, Emperor of this domain Had been Brutalized. The use of force Exacts a formidable price In self-loathing. I was bruised At the center Where I dreamed Tigers caught, Women beaten Over and over Who always lose, Wept bitter tears For Pierrot And for myself.
Who can mediate between the body and its undoing? At night in each of my limbs I feel the skeletal tree ache, and I dream of leaves in their feverish colors, floating through the small streams and tributaries of the blood. At noon in the smoldering woods I gather black grapes that purse and caress the mouth, I gather thistles and burrs  whole armfuls of dissolution, while from a branch the chuck-will's widow calls forgive, forgive
Ran out of tear gas and became panicky, inept kids, and therefore they poured lead into the other kids and shot them dead, and now myself and the whole country are weeping. It's not a matter of degree, not less not more than the Indo-Chinese slaughtered, it is the same. But folk are shattered by home truths as I know who lost my boy. I am not willing to go on this week with business as usual, this month this year let cars slow down and stop and builders break off building and close up the theater. See, the children that we massacre are our own children. Call the soldiers back.
when the spent day begins to frail (whose grave already three or two young stars with spades of silver dig) by beauty i declare to you if what i am at one o'clock to little lips(which have not sinned in whose displeasure lives a kiss) kneeling,your frequent mercy begs, sharply believe me,wholly,well  did(wisely suddenly into a dangerous womb of cringing air) the largest hour push deep his din of wallowing male(shock beyond shock blurted)strokes,vibrant with the purr of echo pouring in a mesh of following tone:did this and this spire strike midnight(and did occur bell beyond fiercely spurting bell a jetted music splashing fresh upon silence)i without fail entered became and was these twin imminent lisping bags of flesh; became eyes moist lithe shuddering big, the luminous laughter,and the legs whereas,at twenty minutes to one,i am this blueeyed Finn emerging from a lovehouse who buttons his coat against the wind
Hasten to your own gun, to your own star, to your own tribe. Hurry while the light lasts, while still you need someone; I don't trust this quiet, I don't like that grave over there. Is it only death that bothers you? So many have done it, brother. So many have turned up their poor toes. Is it only war that blackens you? So many have gone there, brother. So many have taken that boney grin. Is it only blood that sickens you? So many have bathed in it, brother. So many are standing knee-deep there now. Is it only God that heartens you? So many have gone blind, brother. So many have put their eyes in His cunning hock. Is it only Man that frightens you? So many have been fooled, brother. So many hold that key, and that beautiful lock. Hasten to your own kind, to your own dream, to your own land; Hurry while there is still someone to go with you there ...
&lsquo;A bunch of asparagus in a teapot&rsquo; comes at us, not quite part of the plot but life all the same, more so as it's not clich&eacute;d geraniums or a small cute cat with its tail in the spout, enough of that; no, it's the sturdy meaningful straight-bat incongruity of that crock of tendertops. What hand stuffed them, laughed, said &lsquo;Pour the crops!&rsquo; She doesn't spend all morning in the shops. I love that imagined briskness and quick striding into a room, the tilt of head, the deciding never not to risk a prim deriding. Nothing surreal; no pot on the rooftop, no bride in the sky with crowns of greens to drop. You cannot say I want the world to stop. But I'll buy order with a pinch of salt. I'll bless the windfall of a sprightly fault. I love the
How then shall we succeed? The eye must heed the meaning the eye must be free seeing. What is a word to the eye? Meaning. Seeing the pot- boil of leaves in the wind it is a tree watching the pale hoist of shining it is the moon climbing. The tree must be named. This gives it fruit issues its juices. The moon must be named. This renders love madness. There is a gladness in the leaves when the rain stops before the rains stop. This is the drought. It is a fine haze. On clear days lifting from Africa it is the desert's gift of Christmas. By April, deciduous trees have lost their green diligence. A broom is sweeping the sky of its leaves. So the eye waits, the sun's gold weight lightens rain remakes trees leaves brighten the dolour the drying fish flies in the pool.
I count the sleeves which are warm each time I screw my eyes to the twig of infinite pleasure each time each vision spans an arm of russet spittle beside my voice I hear the antlers fitting me to a tree Tender is the missing head its flagellant heart a memory hooked up to blur the ocean a wild gospel of weather in which Coney Island lindens are not native to sky's yellow scheme Nutrition of the shelf outside the seam Life of a torso without a spoon Moonlight nippers fanned Corrupt origin of the interred nose Remnant of some iridescence Lip hood picked off vest buzz Cotton fume parlor prank like that zipper mind I am speaking to hoists spatula sounds hidden from their echoes kisses their rumors momentum of acoustic glimpses wagging the palm of my shoe Untouched miles stream through the book of windy days roll up cranium bars glacial finger its decks of crystal attention I got ducks and gadgets to drift with a tongue that makes the air grow South of heaven the light switch's fatal retread is missing the brush its last strokes of reflection leaping to the mind choir I wear like my health explosive attention brace shedding the fade hair formation winding the music heave
love is more thicker than forget more thinner than recall more seldom than a wave is wet more frequent than to fail it is most mad and moonly and less it shall unbe than all the sea which only is deeper than the sea love is less always than to win less never than alive less bigger than the least begin less littler than forgive it is most sane and sunly and more it cannot die than all the sky which only is higher than the sky
I started with an emergency food voucher, which I unraveled like a Roman scroll at the grocery store. I could hear the royal trumpets behind me, and the customers in the checkout line cocked their heads, a row of curious dogs. Then I got food stamps from the Department of Agriculture, with the Liberty Bell on the cover of the booklet. I opened my booklet of food stamps to see Thomas Jefferson and the Founding Fathers signing the Declaration of Independence on every one dollar coupon. At the back of the booklet, I found instructions on how to shop and a warning that I could not buy cigarettes or beer or restaurant meals with food stamps. I never smoked or drank or ate in restaurants. I only wanted what Jefferson said he wanted, but the back of the booklet told me I couldn't buy that with food stamps, either. While waiting at the welfare office, I would open my booklet of food stamps and talk to Thomas Jefferson. Were you the inventor of the food stamp? Did you give food stamps to Sally Hemmings, the slave with all the children who looked like Thomas Jefferson? I was a history major in college. So I wrote my Declaration of Food Stamps: proclaiming the right to sit in a white linen restaurant, eat as well as Thomas Jefferson, then pay in piles of clipped toenails dumped into the tea.
What has happened to the stars? What thief, thin-soled with rocks hard as seeds at flesh, has stolen them? Surely something darker than the night, the river shuffling aimlessly through the yawning toy box of the universe, the cocked and stunned right arm of the mechanical soldier, has come red-eyed and drooling. It has happened before. I don't mean to harp on the infinite paradoxes there is no untangling, but why have the stars come to rest on our feet, on our soles bloody and crusted, those little mouths that never speak what they meant to? Perhaps it is only a cramp in our sleepless bellies, the green apples we ate one hot afternoon. The books have always warned us. Lying awake in this moonless room I think of stars like a crowd of pinched seeds falling into the apples, sending little brass hooks shooting through the white pulp. By the time the apple's brown ache comes who will know the stars have been stolen, who always rose like fathers, in dignity, over the globes in the grass? If I slide my heavy foot onto the floor, what will fall from my chest? What will fall into my hands heavy with the curving clarity of everything that is not imagination and the filaments of words charred beyond hope? Something has happened in the black room while we were flat on our backs trying to give birth to the stars and the books, in their shrouds, have slept through it. Come to the window and I will show the world without dreams, starless, mouthing itself, and the apples growing black with nothing to tell us. Nothing.
Your canoe stops near a sunflower patch where your daughters swim in two weedy ditches off our shaky docks, cast frogs, hooked through their mouths, bass not yet biting. Moose pie, creamed beans and Jell-O opt new appetites, your girls beach sandpiled in towels; under forty oaks you read chronicles from typed peach paper, last year's spirits pitched in its threshing, blood from the suture of my family. This suture is race as it is blood, long as the frozen lake building messages on typewritten paper, faces of my ancestors, warm in winter only as their long scars touch ours.
Three women laugh aloud in a sun-dappled kitchen in 1927, in South Dakota. They are learning French to improve themselves. Twice a week they come together: today, they are naming vegetables. &ldquo; pointing to the beans. &ldquo;Green,&rdquo; says Elsa, the German picture-bride, lamenting the forests she will never see again. Lottie and Myrtle recall a paradise of their own, gentle hills at Sioux City, on down along the river. They laugh in the afternoon in a house set down on a God-forsaken, near-treeless plain. Each tree they planted in town either broke with ice or wilted in the rainless summer. &ldquo; for cauliflower. Potatoes are &ldquo; The words have such a comforting sound Lottie repeats them, like a mother comforting a child. Oh, my little earth apples, little  my cabbage flowers, oh yes: and now the womens' cheeks and breasts are blooming, their bottoms grow round in the chintz dresses. They are ladies, yes, pious and respectable, but they are laughing now, beyond caring. Such elegant potatoes: <> oh my dears, oh yes.
&lsquo;August is by much the most mute month&rsquo;, yet, the air may be so strongly electric that bells may ring &amp; sparks be discharged in their clappers: &lsquo;put a bird in motion,  To distinguish a bird by its &lsquo;air&rsquo;, to &lsquo;hear&rsquo; the buoyant owls woodpeckers rising &amp; falling in curves  the perpendicularity of skylarks . . . Gilbert White quotes from the Latin:  <> <> <> <> &lsquo;to tease my imagination &amp; recur irresistibly at seasons . . . &rsquo; All day the cobweb fell silently in the air, till whole baskets-full lay round about, &amp; still more descending.
Now I Joseph was walking, and I walked not, Between the allotments on a December morning. The clouds were mauve as a crocus, peeling back petals, And a sparse pollen of snow came parping down On the bare ground and greenhouse groins and dun Tight-head chrysanthemums crumpled by the frost. The cock in the hen-run blustered to its perch On the lid of the swill bucket, rattled its red At the fluttering flakes, levered its throat open  And not a croak creaked out.     I looked about me: The snow was stock-still in the sky like pluckings Of cottonwool glued on a grocer's window, And down in the brown of the dyke, a smoky feather Let on a robin's head, between the black Glass-ally eyes and the gimlet beak, And never a flick it gave to shake it off. Workmen on the electric cable track Swung picks in the air and held them there, rigid, Raised bait to mouths and never took a bite. One, putting up a hand to scratch his head, Shifted the peak of his cap a couple of inch, And never scratched. A dead leaf drifting Hung bracketed against the wire netting Like a pin caught on a magnet.     For at that minute, Making was made, history rolled Backward and forward into time, memory was unfolded Like a quick discovery, old habits were invented, Old phrases coined. The tree grew down Into its sapling self, the sapling into the seed. Cobbles of wall and slate of rafters Were cleft and stratified again as rock, And the rock un-weathered itself a cloud-height higher, And the sea flowed over it. A brand-new now Stretched on either hand to then and someday, Might have and perhaps.     Then suddenly the cock Coughed up its crow, the robin skittered off, And the snow fell like a million pound of shillings. And out in the beginning always of the world I heard the cry of a child.
Deep in these thoughts, more tender than a sky Whose light ebbs far as in futurity, Deep, deeper yet my blessed spirit steep, Singing of you still; you and only you Gave me to breathe and touch and taste, all true, Love from the utmost height and deepest deep In my own heart, as all that summer knows Of glory and perfume hides in one shut rose. You and you only gave me, Dearest, this, A pressure of the hand, a silent kiss, And all is well; the hurt, the pain-pricks healed; And rapt and hushed, as from some green recess Into a golden solitariness, All ours, we look; and suddenly revealed Is all that we in our desire might be, Winged and immortal, fretting to be free. Then in that large, appeasing air we grow Near to Love's greatness, and our hearts outflow. We are as those who traffic with the sea; Washed from our liberated spirits is all That the feared world made stagnant, pent or small, For love has touched us with his majesty: We grow beyond the bounds of time and pain, Then in one heart-beat wondering meet again.
I walked down Whipmawhopmagate  one morning in the winter (&lsquo;The death of a man stands up inside him  like a heron in water.&rsquo;) I saw an old friend staring into  the rain that ran in the gutter. (&lsquo;Death is a hole in the ground, my dear.  I am the dirty water.&rsquo;) I thought to speak, but I could feel  his cancer in my throat. (He turned and, lifting his hand walked up  through Whipmawhopmagate.) There is a silence we hear when  at last the heron cries. This silence falls when Death itself  mourns what dies.
We have been off on a long voyage, have we not? Have done and seen much in that time, but have got Little that you will prize, who are dancing now In the silent town whose lights gleam back from our prow. For you we have brought no pearls or gold, you will learn, And the best we have brought for ourselves is our glad return. We bless the estuary lying quiet in the dark, We praise the power that is given us to steer our barque, With the old delight, with the sense of a brief reprieve, Up by the snowy docks on Christmas Eve. And though you have turned for us, and have taken your release From us and all thought of us, yet on this night of peace Pause for a moment, put by your dance and song: Take to us kindly, and we shall not stay long. We shall dock the ship, and loose the dogs to roam And across the fallen snow shall come to our home. The music will pause, and you will hear our knock On the door of our home. Open. We shall not mock Anything you may do in this sacred place. But look for a moment, and try to recall our face, Remember on Christmas Eve, as you stand in the doorway there And regard us as strangers, the forgotten love we bear, And shall bear it always over the frozen snow When the door is shut again, and once again we go. The souls of the forgotten, for whom there is no repose When the music begins again, and again the doors close, For whom a thought of yours would come the length Of a whole dark hemisphere to give us strength. The souls of the forgotten: others reign in our stead, But let us go with at least your blessing on our head, Who year after year shall creep, forgotten lover and bride, To your door and knock, and knock, at every Christmastide, Who, lost and ever-rejected, turn from your door and weep, And retrace our steps to the harbour, where it lies silent and  deep In a slumber of snow and starlight. This is the scene we know And shall bear in our hearts for ever as worlds away we go: The harbour, the town, the dancing: to which the soul returns, Lost and ever-rejected, under a Star which burns In the zenith over the mainmast. And again it is Christmas morn, And again in the snow and the Star's light, once again we are  born.
<> High stone dusted with autumn snow; From windy sky and dusky valley Summer wanes, and it's time to go. In the rainy spring, by the soaking meadow, The coursing glassy streams Flashed in the day and rushed in the night With a water-sound under dreams. The orchards lifted fingers of blossom, The white clouds lifted up their hands, And the sun moved like a plowing farmer Higher and higher on mountain lands. And tall and purple the meadow clover, Tender and green grew the climbing vine, And sweet were the airs of summer, summer, Warm grass, cattle, and pitch-pine. Cows in the strong light moved for shadow, Goats reached up for their bramble fare, Mowers went swinging down the meadow And women raked at the teddings there. Gold on the glen and gloom on the mountain, High stone dusted with autumn snow; From windy sky and dusky valley Summer wanes, and it's time to go.
You hold the negative up to the light, appreciating the shadows. It is you and I posing as you and I, what seems coming apart at the seam at some hidden locus, some meeting place of sensation and nerve. Looking at ourselves this way we are surrounded by the low clouds of trees in full bloom, my hand in yours is an erasure, perfect, oracular. Now you take the scissors and cut me out, keeping me for yourself. Then you hand me you. The sentimental we agree has its place, if undeveloped. I place you in my wallet in the compartment I never use so the light cannot touch you. You do the same, as if it were possible nothing could ruin us now  so separate, almost unborn again.
Why did the poets come to the desert? They learned the meaning of an oasis, the meaning of heat, fellahin's phrases, tents behind the khamsin-blasted dannert. We watched MacLean at the Ruweisat Ridge giving a piercing look as he passed by the fly-buzzed grey-faced dead; swivelled our eye west through tank-strewn dune and strafed-out village with Henderson; and Hay saw Bizerta burn; Garioch was taken at Tobruk, parched  Morgan ate sand, slept sand at El Ballah while gangrened limbs dropped in the pail; Farouk fed Fraser memorandums like a shrike.
I wonder, can the night go by, Can this shot arrow of travel fly Shaft-golden with light, sheer into the sky  Of a dawned to-morrow, Without ever sleep delivering us From each other, or loosing the dolorous  And turgid sorrow! What is it then that you can see, That at the window endlessly You watch the red sparks whirl and flee  And the night look through? Your presence peering lonelily there Oppresses me so, I can hardly bear  To share the night with you. You hurt my heart-beat's privacy; I wish I could put you away from me; I suffocate in this intimacy  In which I half love you; How I have longed for this night in the train! Yet now every fibre of me cries in pain  To God to remove you! Though surely my soul's best dream is still That a new night pouring down shall swill Us away in an utter sleep, until  We are one, smooth-rounded! Yet closely bitten in to me Is this armour of stiff reluctancy,  And my dream is ill-founded. So, Helen, when another night Comes on us, lift your fingers white And strip me naked, touch me light  Light, light all over. For I ache most earnestly for your touch, Yet I cannot move, however much  I would be your lover. Night after night with a blemish of day Unblown and unblossomed has withered away; Come another night, come a new night, say  Will you pluck it apart? Will you open the amorous, aching bud Of my body, and loose the essential flood  That would pour to you from my heart?
First you invite me to tea under your appletree and now  send me a photograph of where we sat, you, still ill by your herbs in shade and I in a wedge of sun angled  under apples. Let me not break the chain. Send you a poem of your photo of the patio of your new home, wish you  entirely better. The doorway's as narrow in its light as shadow's broad and black in the kitchen. Blackest of all  your bike in silhouette. And the appletree just visible where bright light grows on a shrub I'd know, if it weren't  for those clumps of flowering light you knew I'd like has no flowers. But what can I write that's not in the eye?  How something tall and narrow can suggest a yardage of sun an L, one arm of which you'll plant, where drainpipes ask for disguise  with shade-lovers? How, in a city's heart, Elephant &amp; Castle you can be in the heart of the country, how knee-high trellises  fronting allotments whose tenants stop to talk to you, spell an other worldliness? But you know all that. How memory  speaks to the image, image to the word. How inadequate we are in our borrowings, not knowing if by saying   we do violence. Thank you for the herbs, tea, the photo. Think of this as a postcard but more than that, a short time  spent in your company, after the event, a recognition of those differences we run into now and then, alternatives we never chose   patios with loaded apple-trees, herb troughs, neighbouring histories of architects and saints in the churches of south London;  other people's knowledge vaguely interesting, vaguely boring lifestyles, lovelives and sometimes even illnesses worn transparent  on a face that brings it home: the equity no one has in common; differences that now and then make us feel are of less account  than an hour or two and I hate that word affirming but  affirming, the way women do when we say   (And the facings of your bookshelves like an opening accordion.)
Orange blossoms have dropped their threads On the stone floor of the heart more often than once Between last night's stars and last night's stars. And the Preludes have left their rings On the chalk white of the walls. And the slide-harp has played and played. And now, under the fruit trees, the olives silver then not silver, the wind In them then not, the old man Sits in the sunfall, Slouched and at ease in the sunfall, the leaves tipped in the wind. The world is nothing to him. And the music is nothing to him, and the noon sun. Only the wind matters. Only the wind as it moves through the tin shine of the leaves. And the orange blossoms, scattered like poems on the smooth stones.
The dark subway-station was almost empty at a little after ten that summer morning. The man who sold tokens for the turnstiles was going back to his booth with a broad smile on his face. I supposed he had been engaged in an amusing conversation with the Negro alone on the platform. The black man's face was wrinkled. As he stood there, stooped over a stick, he kept on talking: &ldquo;I cuss my mother in her grave,&rdquo; he was saying in a loud angry voice, &ldquo;because she borned me!&rdquo; What a line for a &ldquo;Mammy&rdquo; song, I thought. By this time there were two or three other passengers on the platform and we stood at a distance from the Negro and watched him, though we pretended not to. He turned to us and said, &ldquo;I wonder how it feels to be white.&rdquo; Just then the train came in and we went inside hoping that the Negro with his disturbance would not enter the brightly-lit car.
Let him who may among the continuing lines seek out that tortured constancy affirms where I persist  let me say across cross purposes that the flower bloomed struggling to assert itself simply under the conflicting lights you will believe me a rose to the end of time
A strelitzia parts the folds of humidity with its beak of cartilage but don't be fooled, it's just held out against the year's last frosts, and its foliage flexes confidence. The risk here is to be channelled into a particular vista, that caught in the concrete spillway you may fail to realise that a bird of paradise will fly unnoticed in this unfamiliar territory where blue-green water spreads wide to its sienna rim, makes islands and bottlenecks of land look luxuriant. Stretching the vista in all directions a bearded dragon zig-zags over the dam's drier face, a clockwork ziggurat restrains a tense silence white horses warm to a desert wind and swim against the anchored points of a tourist compass. The lack of overflow teases the laden clouds without making them spill their hearts, the wind continues its seduction in playing the jarrah strings of the catchment lyre, the pink flute of erosion.
Their boarder had come to America before his wife and children. He sat at the table working at a beginner's book in English. In a moment of pity she began to teach him. Once, when her mother was out marketing, he took hold of her hand and fondled it. She snatched it away. She tried to go on with the lesson as if nothing had happened, but for some time she could feel her heart pounding. She decided to tell her mother nothing because it might worry her. Maybe it was just a way to show his thanks. Besides, she was ashamed. The next night he sat down to his lesson as if nothing had happened; the lessons went on smoothly even with her mother away. One evening she almost danced about the kitchen at her work: they had taken their last examination that morning, school would soon close, and the summer vacation begin. In the afternoon she had gone to Central Park. The girls raced over the meadow, noisy as birds at dawn. After supper she and the boarder sat down to their lesson. The color in her face and eyes had deepened. She smiled and held her face close to his in her eagerness to teach. Her mother was going out to get a mouthful of fresh air after her day in the shop. &ldquo;It's so nice in the street, why don't you come?&rdquo; &ldquo;I'll be soon through, Mamma.&rdquo; His hand was resting on the back of her chair. He pressed her to him. She tried to free herself and drew her head back. He kept kissing her throat, his hands trying to pin down her arms. Suddenly she was limp. He let go. She was looking at him, her mouth open, gasping. She had pushed back her chair and was running out of the door. She wondered that she was not falling she went down the stairs so fast.
The grass below the willow Of my daughter's wash is curled With earthworms, and the world Is measured into row on row Of unspiced houses, painted to seem real. The drugged Long Island summer sun drains Pattern from those empty sleeves, beyond my grandson Squealing in his pen. I have survived my life. The yellow daylight lines the oak leaf And the wire vines melt with the unchanged changes Of the baby. My children have their husbands' hands. My husband's framed, propped bald as a baby on their pianos, My tremendous man. I close my eyes. And all the clothes I have thrown out come back to me, the hollows Of my daughters' slips ... they drift; I see the sheer Summer cottons drift, equivalent to air.
Turning and turning in the widening gyre The falcon cannot hear the falconer; Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world, The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere The ceremony of innocence is drowned; The best lack all conviction, while the worst Are full of passionate intensity. Surely some revelation is at hand; Surely the Second Coming is at hand. The Second Coming! Hardly are those words out When a vast image out of  Troubles my sight: somewhere in sands of the desert A shape with lion body and the head of a man, A gaze blank and pitiless as the sun, Is moving its slow thighs, while all about it Reel shadows of the indignant desert birds. The darkness drops again; but now I know That twenty centuries of stony sleep Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle, And what rough beast, its hour come round at last, Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?
After the Flagstaff slide The grass grows up out of the Asphalt like brush strokes by Memling The great trees bow in the air The brilliant horizontal light Catches the bending branches from underneath And breathes their bright greens Into the blue violent air From behind the first snowy peaks There comes a kind of Groaning noise like something large awakening A wild Art Deco bird The size of a catcher's mitt Flaps up out of the red rocks It moves its wings so fast It seems they will come unhinged When the wind blows this strong The emeralds shift positions on the trees In a kind of rotary floating drift That creates shadows of great meaning And dark impermanence They say places sometimes speak to you most deeply Just when you are about to leave them They also say audacity wins the wars The corollary of which is When you lose your nerve It's time to make yourself scarce
My name meant crippled. Stood, like God the Mother, on its sudden hill our ordinary, extraordinary cathedral. Swallows were like small dark angels there, they said and I could well imagine. When from my narrow bed I heard the bells my heart remembered that the moon was like a small bent needle and my spine was black. But Julian would wash her hands of that and without haste or hark-back would make well my walking and my wasted leg, my will. In that midsummer of my thought the light was like skimmed milk.
I bought myself a hairbrush A Military Hairbrush it turned out It came in a box marked Military Hairbrush I opened the box And took out the Military Hairbrush But there was still something left in the box I shook the box and brought out a brochure It was printed in every colour that exists The brochure showed me with diagrams And a text in seven languages How to brush my hair with the Military Hairbrush I was about to throw the box away When I realised there was something else left in the box I shook the box and out dropped A smaller brush A wooden brush a humble brush Certainly not a military brush Just a brush I looked for an explanation in the brochure And found that this was the brush With which to brush The Military Hairbrush
Swiss bunkers on the Rhine, weeds bearding concrete that bears plank marks from the forms to shade trout fingerlings nibbling in shallows, leaping and we have found the leafy Roman watchtower base, four vanished stories, and crashing through have startled hawk wings widening out over the motionless fieldmouse There is incalculable speed in the floating thing self-contained, weight hanging in empowered patterns that have not yet unfolded, which even those who have lived out their fates have feared so is it a hope that may go farther, hope for  life of the path that goes out, that looks up  and is not crushed  down that path farther  or the wheat track a German farm girl had made over there, Swiss widow now, made every time she hid her friend at night, a swimmer either side would have shot.
The jade slipped from my wrist with the smoothness of water leaving the mountains, silk falling from a shoulder, melon slices sliding across the tongue, the fish returning. The bracelet worn since my first birthday cracked into thousand-year-old eggshells. The sound could be heard ringing across the water where my mother woke in her sleep crying thief. Her nightgown slapped in the wind as he howled clutching his hoard. The cultured pearls. The bone flutes. The peppermint disks of jade. The clean hole in the center, Heaven: the spaces we left empty.
The line between land and water Forms itself without thought. Land ends where on the river No one can walk, Though the deep, familiar Path looks hard as silver, Though land can be held there Firm in precise inversion As an eye holds rock. Neither side of the river Is a mountain, and no mind Hesitates, moving from one Bank to the other, To cross the line. Solid boats grow In the ploughed slime. Ducks with their hungry beaks Break the water. Where's an end to illusion? Swans, clusters of pale stems, Finger the air; Their tuberous bodies Flower momentarily. The river is full of fungi, Its scabby trunk Breathes sour putrefaction Out of the fen. At night, the land slips softly Into the river in vague Columns of light, as the line Between land and water Forms in the eye Of any casual observer Who crosses the line Between himself and object Ceaselessly, without thought.
On board you fashioned me a clever workbasket scrimshaw clothespins, a spool with our ship sailing along the rim above the coiled thread, a pie crimper shaped like a horse- fish, for me to run along the edges of the pies. In all our innocence, we prepared for this scurvy, the disease when the skin stays pinched. Five barrels of pickled limes, and precautions from my father the doctor. Five months into the voyage I would lose my two white chickens off the Cape of Good Hope, and within a year, you from the rigging. First the cart- wheel spinning ...
And waiting to translate into words, words more sublime than the last traces of Nebuchadnezzar, hanging as always on to those vestiges of shattered, uncollected thought, he decided not on Name but the dominance of light-in-thought. How from these &lsquo;slices of a night sun&rsquo;, he could touch upon a point that would give validity to fear of a desert's final, absolute evaporation. Or, in the extreme, breaking of mines, flooding of catacombs.
Ask Orpheus. He'll tell you hell is what you drag up to the surface from below gold, uranium, or the view of a lovely woman stretching her arms toward you as she is sucked back into an atmosphere of deadly justice where they mean it when they say  where luck, weather, that breath of earth that changes leaves and alters your course out of sheer good humor does not blow, because the undergods are methodical and meticulous, and if they don't tell you you'll reap just what you sow, it's only because nothing grows in hell. He'll take you to the Bronx, treeless, cement-lined streets of concrete buildings, and inside one, the smell of urine, rats, and bleach. There's no heat, only a few lit candles. Hit me, Carlos from the dark, a girl holds out her arm. Carlos can't find a vein that's not collapsed, so shoots into her hand. She hates that, how it makes her hands look, and says it's 'cause she's cold, no veins, she's so damn cold, and can't get warm. He'll kick aside the empty vials of bleach Carlos provides to offer you a seat. Make yourself comfortable he'll play a chord they say if you're well organized, you can do that anywhere, even here in hell. It's then you'll check your watch. You'll see it's stopped. And suddenly you'll know: it's working fine. It's then you must ask Orpheus for the song, the one he sang to set that woman free.
Opusculum paedagogum. The pears are not viols, Nudes or bottles. They resemble nothing else. They are yellow forms Composed of curves Bulging toward the base. They are touched red. They are not flat surfaces Having curved outlines. They are round Tapering toward the top. In the way they are modelled There are bits of blue. A hard dry leaf hangs From the stem. The yellow glistens. It glistens with various yellows, Citrons, oranges and greens Flowering over the skin. The shadows of the pears Are blobs on the green cloth. The pears are not seen As the observer wills.
Not over-kind nor over-quick in study Nor skilled in sports nor beautiful was he, Who had come into her life when anybody Would have been welcome, so in need was she. They had become acquainted in this way: He flashed a mirror in her eyes at school; By which he was distinguished; from that day They went about together, as a rule. She told, in secret and with whispering, How he had flashed a mirror in her eyes; And as she told, it struck her with surprise That this was not so wonderful a thing. But what's the odds? It's pretty nice to know You've got a friend to keep you company everywhere you go.
In reality the barn wasn't clean, ninety men Charged to you: The burns, missing teeth, and dark jawbone Of gnawed corn, gangrene from ear to elbow  Even the dying Returned to consciousness by the ammonia of cows. You ran out looking beyond your hands To the ground, above you a wind In the leaves: looking up you found Hanged partisans convulsing in all the trees. Down the road in the garrison hospital, In a cell for the insane, you were given Green tea and cocaine ... With the blue snow of four o'clock Came peace and that evening of memory With Grete, her touch in yellow spatterdock She tied a black ribbon Around the cock of a sleeping horse. It was her  Once put it.  How men talk. I read you first In an overly heated room Sitting in an open window. I left For a walk in woods. Coming out Into a familiar sinkhole, meadow Now snow, deer ran over the crust  Hundreds of them. I thought of my two uncles, Their war, the youngest dead at Luzon, The other, in shock, At his barracks in California: Christmas evening He looked up from the parade grounds and saw An old Japanese prisoner With arms raised, from the hands came A pigeon. The bird climbed, climbed Slowly and then dissolved Like smoke from some lonely howitzer Blossoming out over the bubbling bone pits of lye, over The large sunken eyes of horticulture.
I've watched you long enough, I can speak to you any way I like  I've submitted to your preferences, observing patiently the things you love, speaking through vehicles only, in details of earth, as you prefer, tendrils of blue clematis, light of early evening  you would never accept a voice like mine, indifferent to the objects you busily name, your mouths small circles of awe  And all this time I indulged your limitation, thinking you would cast it aside yourselves sooner or later, thinking matter could not absorb your gaze forever  obstacle of the clematis painting blue flowers on the porch window  I cannot go on restricting myself to images because you think it is your right to dispute my meaning: I am prepared now to force clarity upon you.
I remember each by the food she served, and one by the drink, too, (a foreigner, of course). They all loved food and loved to serve it, particular people who dressed for the occasion and undressed for it in the room of time, the strong, gentle time of desire. They spoke the language of food and love naturally as a mother-tongue; no problem here or accent or of intonation. The simplicity, the directness, the elation of the food-love offered serve as a norm for all my life's daily hell or heaven improvised, missing or attaining form.
Watching the river, each handful of it closing over the next, brown and swollen. Oaklimbs, gnawed at by waterfilm, lifted, relifted, lapped-at all day in this dance of non-discovery. All things are possible. Last year's leaves, coming unstuck from shore, rippling suddenly again with the illusion, and carried, twirling, shiny again and fat, towards the quick throes of another tentative conclusion, bobbing, circling in little suctions their stiff presence on the surface compels. Nothing is virtual. The long brown throat of it sucking up from some faraway melt. Expression pouring forth, all content no meaning. The force of it and the thingness of it identical. Spit forth, licked up, snapped where the force exceeds the weight, clickings, pockets. A long sigh through the land, an exhalation. I let the dog loose in this stretch. Crocus appear in the gassy dank leaves. Many earth gasses, rot gasses. I take them in, breath at a time. I put my breath back out onto the scented immaterial. How the invisible roils. I see it from here and then I see it from here. Is there a new way of looking  valences and little hooks inevitabilities, proba- bilities? It flaps and slaps. Is this body the one I know as me? How private these words? And these? Can you smell it, brown with little froths at the rot's lips, meanwhiles and meanwhiles thawing then growing soggy then the filaments where leaf-matter accrued round a pattern, a law, slipping off, precariously, bit by bit, and flicks, and swiftnesses suddenly more water than not. <> <> and  nailing each point and then each next right point, inter- locking, correct, correct again, each rightness snapping loose, floating, hook in the air, swirling, seed-down, quick
  &lsquo;It's mending worse,&rsquo; he said,   Bending west his head, Strands of anxiety ravelled like old rope,  Skitter of rain on the scorer's shed    His only hope.   Seven down for forty-five,   Catches like stings from a hive, And every man on the boundary appealing   An evening when it's bad to be alive,    And the swifts squealing.   Yet without boo or curse   He waits leg-break or hearse, Obedient in each to law and letter   Life and the weather mending worse,    Or worsening better.
More real than the weak Passing of your sigh, I peer in some hope of quiet. The light is disappearing, And my eyes adjust To the traffic, dense In the craze of its motion. As it grows darker, I am lost in the mechanics Of its encroachment. Were I able I would not hold it back. Woman, you claim You are open To the challenge I offer, That night is as black as Your darkest, grand desire, And that you sing In a singular hope That I am your consummation.
I would have taken this road on sight not knowing who lived along it, not knowing where, if anywhere, it goes. I'd drive unaware Celt blood flows even now in the grass, the result of violent gesture against the injustice of seizure by a callous feudal gentry, imagining my entry foreign, modern American, tame. I'd drive this road for the same old reason, to find a poem, drive slowly by crofters who don't return the wave of strangers, then use feeling alone to follow some personal line that won't do here where the first resistance flared up and got the instant result they fought for, the men and women. They won and they won later in London. Better I put a curse on Ballingall. Roast, roast in the fires of hell. Nothing here more than any place else on this island says we faced them here and bled. You have to know this is where the poor woke up a nation. Same time, back home, in sand, in snow where nothing grows we started Indian reservations.
Autumn leaves bloody the reeking earth That ground the footsteps down Chinchopper Where once the grasshopper Went to town Articulating in every direction Bony dancing legs and squeaks Like a squeegee forth &ldquo;Hee&rdquo; or &ldquo;Eek&rdquo; the simmering summer It lies under The reeking ground Leaves festering Here, killed by a sinful grasshopper, Lies summer, under this mound.
There came of joy a gleam of tears when Daisy struck the A major in  in D minor, and she ran from the piano and swung on her swing. And swung on her swing weightless oh but not fleeing into outer space. And I am so glad for her the sunflowers tower three times as tall as she in August and the Connecticut is still sweet, where we live. Studying astronomy noon and night her forehead is furrowed by puzzling problems the effect of the impact of meteors on the Moon the hydrogen exploding and the Doppler shift the signals vanish: surely Sally is possessed by the ghost of her star-drunk son. Mowing down many thousands of dandelions on the meadow I have plucked one to bring to the grave of Matty after his winter sleep. He was my golden weed: we deemed ourselves among the common of this world, and also we were splendid. So I say to whom? in the speechless language of flowers. These flat and uneventful days scratchy with ailing health I straggle almost pleased: rich and ripe berries though small I find to hand a preface for Alexander Berkman and praising Speech at the M.L.A.; the Governor invited us to St. Thomas which was better far than February and I shall go to Mexico in March. The animated talking of Sally and Daisy in the next room is lovable which I will go and tell them  unlike me it is an event.
Julian Come back It can't be long For the emperor He sees plots everywhere Has executed three postmen Rants in print against his Former allies Imagines himself a Yoruba god Has asked the Bishops to Deify him Not only is he short He's nuts Julian come back The people are crapping In the temples Barbarian professors Are teaching one god They are ripping the limbs Off our fetishes They are carving the sea Monsters from our totems They made a pile of our Wood sculpture and set fire To it Julian Come back Rude hags Have crashed the senate And are spitting on the Elders Meanwhile, Julian The perennial art major Ponders in the right wing Of the monastery museum The Egyptian collection
Returning to the class of discussable referents I call attention to three moderate crows in altercation on my linden tree  and already I bulk large in this fable whenas my only thoughts were &ldquo;crows,&rdquo; &ldquo;I am protected,&rdquo; &ldquo;there goes one now&rdquo; and &ldquo;now the other two are gone.&rdquo; Picture me at the window, sky empty, tree empty. Why do I have to be at all in this picture? You don't know me. I'm not discussable, and you, you're just a grammatical imputation. But the crows were real. But whose word are you taking that they were? Mine? Or your own, caught by the word &ldquo;crows&rdquo; into seeing black slow winds, a rainy sky?
When I was a kid in an orphanage Christmas was just another &ldquo;visiting day.&rdquo; I sat in the hall next to my aunt. I watched Donald, across from us, his eyes lit up as he sat by his fat gramma, his &ldquo;only living relative&rdquo; we knew that term and I heard her say, &ldquo;I'm sorry, Donald, it's all I have.&rdquo; It was a giant red apple, a &ldquo;delicious&rdquo; which she had polished until it gleamed. Donald, how I hated you, for having a gramma like that, who brought you a red apple glowing with love. I followed you for days but you wouldn't put it down, and we fought at least a dozen times, duels nearly to the death, over other things.
<> Apples fell to frost; and the lonely deer, Having forgotten his wild autumn fear, Rummages on a hillside, cold, apart. There is no sound except the swishing start Of snow falling from hemlocks, and the sere Cracking of frosty twigs that drums a clear Pulse from the forest's deep cathedral heart. Only a careless rabbit track, fluffing Off toward the pine woods, shows that this is ground Of little lives that come without a sound And stitch the snow, and leave; and there is nothing Left but the track, and dry methodical snows That trail it down, and after a little, close.
No one's twisting her arm but there it is, locked backwards in a half-nelson, broken like a shotgun. In hand, a spray of corn spills out like a tail of peahen feathers. The nearest is standing but bends also. Like a forced branch or a trained limb, something which has given, she curves, disarmed, a bow without string hemmed in under the skyline. The third shadows the first, and if the sunset is a spotlight then she steals the finale with a bow, not a curtsy. Past caring she forgets the task, if it was picking or planting, whether it was corn or barley. Let me say this: we trip across the fields like tourists; take flowers, tell huge stories  lies, and think only of the poppies. It could be midnight when the evening fades; the hammock, the hats, the picnic basket, the day like an apple not even bruised but somehow bottled, the road in sight, the car where we left it. It will right itself, that square of flattened grass where we laid the blanket.
Her hands were cold, she hid them under her arms, she walked, she prayed (to walk is to pray) to the Red God at the bottom of her body, the noble one, the pure one inside, where the love is. She prayed to be worthy of the god who was her. Where sunshine gets lost and faces candidly outlined by eye's anxiety for the Other tend to appear and crows chase hawks  she prayed to the Gods of her body to be well and to be many. Her sleep woke her and she was. She found a red pen in her and wrote. A boulder is a thing to roll away. Night noises: scantlings at some shivaree  it is the  and honor the Gods inside your body. You cannot know how many of them there are and how far their distant fiefdoms spread or what the edges or the limits of you are, even you, not to speak of them. You are a congress of such powers and a voice. The shape they lend the wind is what you speak.
Do they wake careless and warm with light on the unwashed windows and a perpetual smell of bacon, do their hearts sink at today's martyr with his unpronounceable name and strange manner of execution? Do they wake out of the darkness with hearts thudding like ours and reach for the souvenir lamp-switch then shove a chair against the door and key facts into the desk-top computer while cold rattles along the corridor? Do they cry out in sleep at some barely-crushed thought, some failure to see the joke, or do they rest in their dreams along the surface of the water like a bevy of dragonflies slack and blue in the shallows whirring among reed-mace and water-forget-me-not while the ripples cluck? Do they wake in ordinary time to green curtains slapping the frame of a day that'll cloud later on, to cars nudging and growling for space, to a baptismal mother, wan with her eagerness and her sleepless, milk-sodden nights? Do they reach and stroke the uneven plaster and sniff the lime-blossom threading like silk through the room, or do they wait, stretched out like babies in the gold of its being too early with sun on their ceilings wobbling like jelly while their housekeepers jingle the milk-bottles and cry &lsquo;Father!&rsquo; in sixty-year-old voices and scorch toast with devotion  do they sense the milk in the pan rising then dive with their blue chins, blundering through prayer under their honeycomb blankets?
Most men hire out their lives To finish off with nights like this, The blue from which the darkness pours Upon the knotted apple tree To simplify the shape of long neglect, And some of them have stayed in love A lifetime with intimate strangers, Discovered a talent for taking a walk Or for blether begun at the table at noon And kept through sleep and next day's lack: But half will meet the end alone And from a cramped obituary spell out A name that cannot now be learned Though it is said like rosaries And written down the margins of the page. I've seen my elders pad their gardens Uselessly and try to read. Now there is only leisure to exhaust, And a tree by the builders' default. It bore no fruit I ever saw. But let there be one widower To see one yellow apple wax Towards its perihelion And have his solitude precise And rich until the tree is dark.
<> On the flockless airs your level course is through And on the cumulus that buttresses the blue, You will at last outpass the greener ground That charts the world with hills and surfs around Into an eddied fog, muffling the motors' sound. Your frosted ailerons that sink and gyre there With idle, noiseless engines will descend the vacant air To that white continent that ends the hemisphere. There you will breathe where few brought lung before, On a pale space where neither house nor store Is found or if was once, is here no more. You'll find that the endless dry wind there is known As a quick tourniquet turned on the skeleton, But broad as the horizons are, and solid as a stone. And to conserve your breath you will not speak or sigh Or, waste of brawn, wipe crystals from your eye, Or look up much into the snowy sky. But, in remembering, old images may pass Of morning streets in cities clear as glass That seemed, like this, empty of men and grass. The still, surrounding, circular perfection Of no more south, of north in each direction Will ring you where the longitudes vanish in an intersection. That will be the bottom, and you cannot stay there, But lift a cairn, that ancient shape, familiar, Over the day you came and that day's fear.
The sun, the warm man renting boats and warm farms slanting to the lake decide the wind is warm. Our numb hands fight the anchor rope. We drift to a wobbly stop in lilies. That green crud (algae) makes this lake look stagnant every May. Chorus- girls could strut along that shore or a king replace the farms he burned with castles, but the blackbird on the reed that bows defeated will remain, his red ignited by the wind. A reel is singing nylon down the guides, and in that second sky a line is moving, terrified. Blood and rainbow sides are also red. Underwater, the farms go on. Catfish graze like cattle in the weeds and trout fly over the catfish like those high birds without form or name, flying the morning away.
<>  In the old house speak of love to-day, Love long past; and where the soft day closes,  Down the west gleams, golden-red, a ray. Pointing where departed splendor perished,  And the path that night shall walk, and hang, On blue boughs of heaven, gold, long cherished   Fruit Hesperian, that the ancients sang. And to him, who sits there dreaming, musing,  At the window in the twilight wan, Like old scent of roses interfusing,  Comes a vision of a day that's gone. And he sees Youth, walking brave but dimly  'Mid the roses, in the afterglow; And beside him, like a star seen slimly,  Love, who used to meet him long-ago. And again he seems to hear the flowers  Whispering faintly of what no one knows  Of the dreams they dreamed there for long hours,  Youth and Love, between their hearts a rose. Youth is dead; and Love, oh, where departed!  Like the last streak of the dying day, Somewhere yonder, in a world uncharted,  Calling him, with memories, away.
Sleepwalker is henry hill, the wiseguy who survives in witnessprotectionville, somewhere in the sun belt Sleepwalker never exactly dies, he is the mercenary workman spared by the driven killers of history achilles drunk on adrenalin and endorphins, lurching from the tent to avenge patroclus, roland, hannibal at cannae, lee at fredericksburg by the river of infinity, the dust full of gods and a fine aerosol spray of blood and tissue  for what men do in battle, a unit of work to undo so many, yet the work is never complete even in death's strong house there is always something left to dream, a ghost breath, a phantom
I hear him, see him interpenetrate those shadows warping the garden pathways, as the dark steps I climb are lit up by his Eye magnetic to the moon, <> I have not seen him when windows are mute to whisper his name; on that moment erroneous bats slip out through the sky. His lair conceives my heart, all hearts make the triangle he uses for a nose, sniffing bloodways to my brain: <> On a sudden appearance he tortures leaves, flays branches and divides segments the sun has drawn. I do not falter  in the dark he fortifies. His color is  to distend him over the earth. He does not fly. You meet him while walking. He is not easily enticed to manifestation, but stony silence, petrified moments  a transfiguration will bring him out, focused on the screen where all transfigured bodies are. You must be humble to his fangs that paw the moonball dissolving in the space from the corner of your eye: he will trick you otherwise  into daylight, where you meet his double while running. By night, the deltas of the moon-spilled planet are stoned under his wriggling light. <>
That town in Spain is where, Hemingway said, you should run off to if you ever found somebody to run off to with. So that's where I went looking, that town perched on a cliff over vast fields of almonds. A woman who claimed to be a countess showed me the best of her rooms, all along a corridor. Each had old beds and chandeliers dusty and busy with light gathered from windows, and the walls had fretwork alcoves for candles and saints. Each window opened to a courtyard full of flowers I didn't take time to inhale. My Spanish was  and I kept smiling all the way through corridors and courtyards, under arches giving out to the blue space above the almond fields. I was vague about when you would arrive. Then I went wandering down from that cliff into the valley full of pink blossoms. A tethered burro stood grazing, so peaceful I was sure he had never known a great passion.
How lush, how loose, the uninhibited squash is. If ever hearts (and these immoderate leaves Are vegetable hearts) were worn on sleeves, The squash's are. In green the squash vine gushes. The flowers are cornucopias of summer, Briefly exuberant and cheaply golden. And if they make a show of being hidden, Are open promiscuously to every comer. Let the squash be what it was doomed to be By the old Gardener with the shrewd green thumb. Let it expand and sprawl, defenseless, dumb. But let me be the fiber-disciplined tree Whose leaf (with something to say in wind) is small, Reduced to the ingenuity of a green splinter Sharp to defy or fraternize with winter, Or if not that, prepared in fall to fall.
I'm deep in trouble, Nobody to understand, Lord, Lord! Deep in trouble, Nobody to understand, O, Lord! Gonna pray to ma Jesus, Ask him to gimme His hand. Ma Lord! I'm moanin', moanin', Nobody cares just why. No, Lord! Moanin', moanin', Feels like I could die. O, Lord! Sho, there must be peace, Ma Jesus, Somewhere in yo' sky. Yes, Lord!
I recognize the quiet and the charm, This safe enclosed room where a woman sews And life is tempered, orderly, and calm. Through the Dutch door, half open, sunlight streams And throws a pale square down on the red tiles. The cosy black dog suns himself and dreams. Even the bed is sheltered, it encloses, A cupboard to keep people safe from harm, Where copper glows with the warm flush of roses. The atmosphere is all domestic, human, Chaos subdued by the sheer power of need. This is a room where I have lived as woman, Lived too what the Dutch painter does not tell  The wild skies overhead, dissolving, breaking, And how that broken light is never still, And how the roar of waves is always near, What bitter tumult, treacherous and cold, Attacks the solemn charm year after year! It must be felt as peace won and maintained Against those terrbile antagonists  How many from this quiet room have drowned? How many left to go, drunk on the wind, And take their ships into heartbreaking seas; How many whom no woman's peace could bind? Bent to her sewing, she looks drenched in calm. Raw grief is disciplined to the fine thread. But in her heart this woman is the storm; Alive, deep in herself, holds wind and rain, Remaking chaos into an intimate order Where sometimes light flows through a windowpane.
A noon with twilight overtones from open windows looking down. Hell! it goes by. The trees practice green in faithful measure. It could be what I'm waiting for is not here at all. Yet the trees have it, don't they? Absorbed in their own magic, abundant, hermetic, wide open. The painting within itself, a boy that has learned to whistle, a fisherman. The painting living its magic, admitting nothing, being, the boy pushing his hands further into his pockets, the fisherman beginning the day, in dew and half-dark, by a river whose darkness will be defined as brown in a half-hour. The painting suspended in itself, an angler in the suspense of daybreak, whistling to itself. Where the noon passes in camouflage of twilight doesn't cease to look into it from his oblique angle, leafwise, &lsquo;... maintains dialog with his heart,&rsquo; doesn't spill the beans balances like a papaya tree on a single young elephant-leg. A glass brimming, not spilling, the green trees practising their art. &lsquo;A wonder from the true world,&rsquo; he who accomplished it &lsquo;overwhelmed with the wonder which rises out of his doing.&rsquo;
Stupid? Of course that older lot were stupid. Any up-to-date, in poet knows the bloody world was made for woe and life for death and man is either dolt or dupe, but those old locals never seemed to learn. Emerson unlocked the tomb and stood and stared at what had once been human, once been his, and made that entry in his journal. Whitman, in the stinking wards, uncovered dead men's faces when the squad came round at night and morning for the bodies, but not to rage at death to kiss them with his love. Emily, although she said she wrote as boys beside a graveyard whistle, pressed no terrified finger to her wrist: what frightened Emily was joy, the robin's note. And later, when the word was Tragic Vision haunting thickets of despair  beckets of all the boredom flesh is heir to  Frost went walking off alone in his derision. Too ignorant to know what nightfall meant, or why the thrush calls when the stars begin, he told the weeping world he'd not come in (even if asked, he said, and he hadn't been) to mope among the hemlocks and lament. He was out for stars, he told them, with that Yankee grin. Stupid? Like all the rest: he didn't know. And yet there's something
I stand again on the shore Where we stood and watched the waves. Or rather, since I write this I imagine us standing there. So I sit, town-girt, and imagine Me standing by you on the shore But the vision not being a pen Me writing was only a thought. I was walking around the streets Busy, and the mind moving And now that I sit at my desk Holding an actual pen I remember the pleasant morning When I saw myself sitting down Late on a warm evening And fixing this scene of something That now is so tiny and far So painted, so set and silent In the glass of the inner eye That the only thing left to do Is to take you by the hand And run up the bank to the sea, And I sit here making up that.
while I beside her stood austere to see my paradise decay; From underneath the ground I heard her tunnelled agony of despair ricochet from earth to air; I learned the word that Adam's ear in Eden heard the day Man fell (Who, tasting Mercy, swallowed Hell). And then I saw Death lovingly take his long fingers from the scythe to gather ants &amp; worms &amp; me from out the muck wherein we writhed. He laid me where my coffin sits and nailed the lid with cigarettes. He wove a lily garland sweet which insects crawled upon to eat. Then he laid my coffin down in the lonesome graveyard ground. Down he laid my coffin, by the bed wherein my saviour died.
The walls are lined with mirrors, doubling their images, front and back. You see yourself receding in a tunnel. The man on the adjacent bicycle speaks: &ldquo;Whakunam?&rdquo; Finally I understand: he has no voice box. &ldquo;Whakunam?&rdquo; means &ldquo;What's your name?&rdquo; &ldquo;Amjaw&rdquo; &ldquo;I am George.&rdquo; There are impressive physical specimens: body builders, weight lifters with limbs of oak, bellies ridged like washboards. On the other hand, some whose doctors have said, &ldquo;Exercise, or else!&rdquo; And some like George, and a night watchman whose legs are withered and walks dragging each foot across the floor, like a &ldquo;partially destroyed insect&rdquo;  the cripple Doyle in  The time will pass more easily thinking about  Without fiction life would be hell. I feel like a disembodied spirit. Who is that balding middle-aged man in the mirror, pedalling away from me? Strange, the back of one's own head and body growing small.
Look she said this is not the distance we wanted to stay at We wanted to get close, very close. But what is the way in again? And is it too late? She could hear the actions rushing past but they are on another track. And in the silence, or whatever it is that follows, there was still the buzzing: motes, spores, aftereffects and whatnot recalled the morning after. Then the thickness you can't get past called  Then the you, whoever you are, peering down to see if it's done yet. Then just the look on things of being looked-at. Then just the look on things of being seen.
<> Was there when light came still and dry In through the crevices of cloud; Only the thunder spoke aloud. The sky hung down like yellow plush Above the wood's deep, sullen hush. The deer were quiet; in the brake Lay stretched the cold uneasy snake, Chained to the spot where he had lain, His eyes like glittering drops of rain. There was no movement, and no sound But died against the huddled ground. And then a bird broke out and cried From the sooty thunderside. I had not thought my flesh could part; But those were wings that scraped my heart.
a dog lover, a lover of dogsin a land where poodles eat/live cleaner than their masters &amp; their masters use the colored people to walk thatwhich they love, while they wander in &amp; out of our lives running the world. (stop! in the name of love, before you break my heart) u moved with childlike vision deeper into lassieland to become the new wonderwoman of the dirty-world we remember the 3/the three young baaaaad detroiters of younger years when i &amp; other blacks moved with u &amp; all our thoughts dwelled on the limits of forget &amp; forgive. (stop! in the name of love, before you break my heart) diana, we left u (back in those un-thinking days)there on the dance floor teaching marlon brando the monkey (the only dance you performed with authority) we washed our faces anew as the two of you dreamed a single mind. diana, yr/new vision worries me because i, as once you, knew/know the hungry dayswhen our fathers went to ford motor co., and our mothers in the morning traffic to the residential sections of dearborn. little supreme, only the well fed  (stop! in the name of love, before you break....) ladies &amp; gents we proudly present the swinging su-premessssss.... correction, correction. ladies &amp; gents we proudly present diana rossss and the supremes. and there u stood, a skinny earthling viewing herself as a mov ing star. as a moving star u will travel north by northwest deeper into the ugliness of yr/bent ego. &amp; for this i/we cannot forgive. (stop! in the name of love,...............) u, the gifted voice, a symphony, have now joined the hippy generation to become unhipped, to become the symbol of a new aberration, the wearer of other people's hair. to become one of the real animals of this earth. we wish u luck &amp; luckily u'll need it in yr/new found image of a mov ing star, a moving star, moving moving moving on to play a tooth-pick in a
Long and smelling good, the cemetery grass could be a kiss. You failed a field of Ypsilanti wheat. Below your stone you never try to touch her there beside you. I used to blame your failure on the moon. When old, you needed words like &ldquo;lake.&rdquo; &ldquo;Lake&rdquo; I'd say. Your eyes began to farm. Horses took you and a friend where coves were wonderful with bass bluegills clowning for your rind below the log. Catfish ran five pounds. See my picture. See my mustache then. Any photo fades. You remain in yellow with your catch. I'd like to sing you, point each word about you up and shoot. Wasn't gold too easy for your maps, or love too simple for your brilliant arms? I said a British wind was in your face  only blue the undertaker planned. The tunes you hummed were so unknown I told a dog you were a fine composer. Why am I afraid or sorry you are dead? My hands paid contraband to be this still. My mouth rotted with the truth to be as tough as wheat before your stone.
Under the windsong of the redwood trees we were two Adams together clinging in the long nakedness of afternoon Rediscovering close harmony fingers practiced fresh arpeggios nipples shone from riper torsos loins opened into full bloom Never had sweat tasted so juicy or prolonged kiss so penetrant Who in Eden lives for fashion for investmentfor notoriety? Who is planning to go anywhere? Reciprocal in savoring we explored carnal phenomena murmured unsayable secrets tossed raptures back and forth drank from each other's auras till we purred with the hum of the world Two seasoned lovers clinging together renewed their Adamness on a bed of fern under the windsong of the ancient trees
It is there. And we are there. In it. Walking in it, talking, holding hands. The nickel postcard the glossy trees; the waterfalls, the unsuspecting deer. A scene shot from a car window: a slowly moving car, with many windows, and a good camera. And we are walking in it. We tell ourselves, quietly, perhaps screaming, ... quietly, &ldquo;We are walking in it.&rdquo; And our voices sound, somehow, as if we were behind windows, or within. We embrace, and are in love. The deer that we are watching, at the same time (through cameras, binoculars, eyes ...) are so perfectly wild, and concerned  with the scene they are, their glossy fate silence, Nature, their rotogravure pose  that they remain, not watching; rather, staring away from us, into the earnest, green and inoffensive trees.
Sunder me from my bones, O sword of God, Till they stand stark and strange as do the trees; That I whose heart goes up with the soaring woods May marvel as much at these. Sunder me from my blood that in the dark I hear that red ancestral river run, Like branching buried floods that find the sea But never see the sun. Give me miraculous eyes to see my eyes, Those rolling mirrors made alive in me, Terrible crystal more incredible Than all the things they see. Sunder me from my soul, that I may see The sins like streaming wounds, the life's brave beat; Till I shall save myself, as I would save A stranger in the street.
&lsquo;Soldier, soldier come from the wars, &lsquo;Why don't you march with my true love?&rsquo; &lsquo;We're fresh from off the ship an' 'e's, maybe, give the slip, &lsquo;An' you'd best go look for a new love.&rsquo;  New love! True love!  Best go look for a new love,  The dead they cannot rise, an' you'd better dry your eyes,  An' you'd best go look for a new love. &lsquo;Soldier, soldier come from the wars, &lsquo;What did you see o' my true love?&rsquo; &lsquo;I seen 'im serve the Queen in a suit o' rifle-green, &lsquo;An' you'd best go look for a new love.&rsquo; &lsquo;Soldier, soldier come from the wars, &lsquo;Did ye see no more o' my true love?&rsquo; &lsquo;I seen 'im runnin' by when the shots begun to fly  &lsquo;But you'd best go look for a new love.&rsquo; &lsquo;Soldier, soldier come from the wars, &lsquo;Did aught take 'arm to my true love?&rsquo; &lsquo;I couldn't see the fight, for the smoke it lay so white  &lsquo;And you'd best go look for a new love.&rsquo; &lsquo;Soldier, soldier come from the wars, &lsquo;I'll up an' tend to my true love!&rsquo; &lsquo;'E's lying on the dead with a bullet through 'is 'ead, &lsquo;An' you'd best go look for a new love.&rsquo; &lsquo;Soldier, soldier come from the wars, &lsquo;I'll down an' die with my true love!&rsquo; &lsquo;The pit we dug'll 'ide 'im an' the twenty more beside 'im  &lsquo;An' you'd best go look for a new love.&rsquo; &lsquo;Soldier, soldier come from the wars, &lsquo;Do you bring no sign from my true love?&rsquo; &lsquo;I bring a lock of 'air that 'e allus used to wear, &lsquo;An' you'd best go look for a new love.&rsquo; &lsquo;Soldier, soldier come from the wars, &lsquo;O then I know it's true I've lost my true love!&rsquo; &lsquo;An' I tell you truth again when you've lost the feel o' pain &lsquo;You'd best take me for your new love.&rsquo;  True love! New love!  Best take 'im for a new love,  The dead they cannot rise, an' you'd better dry your eyes  An' you'd best take 'im for your new love.
Stacked and scattered here and there About the main room of the flat The boxes, chairs and bulging suitcases Have skidded to a sudden standstill. My parents start arranging things. They bring the table to the kitchen, Considering its shape and size Against the kitchen's for a minute, Then place one edge against the wall. They unstrangle lamps of their flexes. They try to imagine their future life With the new couch there, or there, As though the choice that they make now Will set them on one course for years. The TV is a square of solid shadow Securely housed in imitation teak. Switched on. A phosphorescence starts to speak. They watch the country turning through a talk-show. The country stretches to the rocks And sand and cliffs and promenades Which mark the island's end; the fields And hills and that one rainy street Through which the border runs; standing Idly by itself in mohair, With patriotic decency. The floor space of their new apartment Makes up one tiny tract of this. Free of their parents' furniture and prints They love to plan and switch and rearrange. Things brim with possibility, with change. Themselves in three months to become new parents. For six or seven days they labour To make the cosmos I'll inhabit. I orbit in my mother's stomach Oblivious to the fact that soon I will be made to move as well.
If you were to try to say, Half-closing your eyes in the way you have, Your mouth pulled in a bit in its pre-speech purpose.... If you were to turn your face to me, That sudden look of inward revelation, When out of so much of thought, so much of thinking  Out of your nights, as you lie abed and pick up the pieces; Out of your days; Over whatever task it is you are doing, in whatever place, Going about your unguessable business With that air of half-abstraction, Half-involvement.... If you were to lift up your face, And from so dense a demand, so deep a denial; From your hemmed and hampered past, When your world was weak, And all your instance Turned on the tremble of a touch, And you had no grip, no grasp.... If you were to break, The tears beat from your eyes; All your hard hurt broke open and bared In its sudden gust of bleak exposure.... If you were to try.... Under my hand your heart hits like a bird's, Hushed in the palms, a muffled flutter, And all the instinct of its flight Shut in its wings.
A simple nosegay! was that much to ask? (Winter still nagged, with scarce a bud yet showing.) He loved her ill, if he resigned the task. &lsquo;Somewhere,&rsquo; she cried, &lsquo;there must be blossom blowing.&rsquo; It seems my lady wept and the troll swore By Heaven he hated tears: he'd cure her spleen  Where she had begged one flower he'd shower fourscore, A bunch fit to amaze a China Queen. Cold fog-drawn Lily, pale mist-magic Rose He conjured, and in a glassy cauldron set With elvish unsubstantial Mignonette And such vague bloom as wandering dreams enclose. But she? Awed,  Charmed to tears, Distracted,  Yet  Even yet, perhaps, a trifle piqued who knows?
Richard's lover has the look, robust and pure, of a nineteenth-century Russian heroine. Surely her brows and chin, smooth hair, free walk, and the way she can sit poised and quiet, speak of depth. Across the room his profile all I can see beyond the range of heads and shoulders, in smoke, in candlelight  looks off into inner distance, poignant, a little older than last year, still very young though. I think she is watching him too. Calmly, calmly, I am seeing them both. Reassured.
Is there a cause why we should wake the dead? Should they not sleep, safe in the sepulchre? I, a man walking, one alive to fear, Hear these deep, holy boughs and berries red Sweep the dark graves, then stop where seem to tread Long-vanished mourners from an earlier year. Late-leaving, then, from each fresh grave I hear Love's nearmost: &lsquo;O, who will lift this lost, loved head, Crowned with flowers fading, whose quick colours pray?&rsquo; Then none makes answer; yet, soon, bodily Reaching to God, I hear that good thief say: &lsquo;Lord, for no wrong Thou diest, but justly we&rsquo;. That word kills grief, and through the dark-boughed tree Gives to each dead his resurrection day.
After digging in the rubble of the ruined house For nine days They've found a  No fingerprints; no hands. One leg and the head blown off. The story in the  Didn't even tell The sex of the torso ... These were some of the people Who'd take power to the people In their own hands. All their questions have one answer. Dynamite Makes non-negotiable demands For an apocalypse, In case of survivors. Once, another world ago, There was a girl I never dreamed Would be like them: She seemed to lack nothing  Looks, friends, certainly a silver Spoon had stirred her porringer  She'd sit scribbling Notes in the next to the back row, But I can't remember now One word she wrote for me.  Good God, Was it something  About Thoreau Shorted her fuse? Oh, Such unbalanced, mad Action is surely extra-curricular  If the discourse of our liberal arts Which entertains all rival truths as friends And rival visions reconciles Could but bring the pleasures of its wholeness To a mind Rent by frenzy  But how conceive what hatred Of the self, turned inside-out, reviles The whole great beckoning world, or what desire Sentenced the soul To that dark cellar where all life became So foul With the pitch of rage, Rage, rage, rage to set aflame Father's house what can assuage That fire or that misfire?
When I was nearly six my father opened his magic doctor bag: two tongue depressors fastened by a rubber band; one flick of his hairy wrist and lo! we invented flight.
When the season was dry and the sun was hot, And the hornet sucked, gaunt on the apricot, And the ripe peach dropped, to its seed a-rot,  With a lean, red wasp that stung and clung: When the hollyhocks, ranked in the garden plot, More seed-pods had than blossoms, I wot,  Then all had been said and been sung, And meseemed that my heart had forgot. When the black grape bulged with the juice that burst Through its thick blue skin that was cracked with thirst, And the round, ripe pippins, that summer had nursed,  In the yellowing leaves o' the orchard hung: When the farmer, his lips with whistling pursed, To his sun-tanned brow in the corn was immersed,  Then something was said or was sung, And I remembered as much as I durst. Now the sky of December gray drips and drips, And eaves of the barn the icicle tips, And the cackling hen on the snow-path slips,  And the cattle shiver the fields among: Now the ears of the milkmaid the north-wind nips, And the red-chapped cheeks of the farm-boy whips,  What, what shall be said or be sung, With my lips pressed warm to your lips!
You ask me if it's lava That's stopped here, At the sea, if it's fire That's bubbled and cooled, Because of the sea, Into these great chunks. I don't know, and answer &ldquo;I suppose so.&rdquo; We join Hands and walk in The shadows of the rock's History, kick a few Pebbles on the sand. Thinking of someone else I decide it was not so casual, The way she betrayed me, That it was a grief Burning out only now in Your strange and cooling presence.
<> Or the wide wastes beyond the cities, Teams in grey deploy through sunlight. Talk it up, boys, a little practice. Coming in stubby and fast, the baseman Gathers a grounder in fat green grass, Picks it stinging and clipped as wit Into the leather: a swinging step Wings it deadeye down to first. Smack. Oh, attaboy, attyoldboy. Catcher reverses his cap, pulls down Sweaty casque, and squats in the dust: Pitcher rubs new ball on his pants, Chewing, puts a jet behind him; Nods past batter, taking his time. Batter settles, tugs at his cap: A spinning ball: step and swing to it, Caught like a cheek before it ducks By shivery hickory: socko, baby: Cleats dig into dust. Outfielder, On his way, looking over shoulder, Makes it a triple. A long peg home. Innings and afternoons. Fly lost in sunset. Throwing arm gone bad. There's your old ball game. Cool reek of the field. Reek of companions.
We remember you calling America on the phone: frontal friends from college who worked in animal ecstasy, hypos in the animal hotel; the drenched finger of syrup you took up in a high, that high gone in the papers of the factory in its oily cones, &lsquo;Detroit, please&rsquo; and our fingers dialing: you called it primal, the code your scream, and on the assembly line of Cadillac I heard you sigh.
Let's step on daddy's head shout the children my dear children as we walk in the country on a sunny summer day my shadow bobs dark on the road as we walk and they jump on its head and my love of them fills me all full of soft feelings now I duck with my head so they'll miss when they jump they screech with delight and I moan oh you're hurting you're hurting me stop and they jump all the harder and love fills the whole road but I see it run on through the years and I know how some day they must jump when it won't be this shadow but really my head (as I stepped on my own father's head) it will hurt really hurt and I wonder if then I will have love enough will I have love enough when it's not just a game?
Grief is like a child, Led with relentless hand By a strange nurse, whose face Seems never to have smiled, Whose onward gaze severe Slackens not, nor her pace, Nor that child's faltering fear Stoops she to understand. So strides the world, while grief Unwilling is borne on, With ever lingering mind, Through the strange days, alone. Oh, like a fluttering leaf On the ways of the strong wind, Or pebbles helpless thrown By night on a wild strand, Lost are the thoughts of grief, That none can understand!
You say This is all there is I say nothing much to help Say this Say what? It is what you say it is And it is everything You teach me this is all there is And this is all there is is everything A night back there where a head is turning to kiss air is all there is is everything Out there stars are dark The motel is quiet Bob One of the colors is missing from our world
Wings outstretched, a horned owl Nailed beneath a crown Of antlers on the barn door Shrivels in the wind, And in the swale Among black pellets, Signatures of deer, The wild roses of the field   As tall as trees. Each leafy bough Beneath the deepest center of the sky Is scented crimson as it's green with thorns. There, on the sky's brim, floats One lone jet too high To break the day's long stillnesses. Its white breath Splits the sky. The halves of heaven Are bluer than each other. All they cover leans to sign Bequests of their significance, Urgent as the center of the sun, Yet silent And invisible As those fixed stars We drift beneath In the confusions of our light.
opposing needs, priming pellegra with plastic cement like jelly rubber singing aging movies, tall tales lugging drabness out of forums: humitrophic, water glass or sundial gas-bagging in the shade, Ah such is fame passing the time. The car comes. A stretch in tails. Silk doors predella adjuncting talent AND the driver. Let us in! Take us entire rhomboidal all and Oolala susurrous through disconnexion, baffling sibilance. O my flappers, what a team we make! And the planets co-habitate and read life impression, you have your strict and your lax, the cups drink too much and the television in the back of the limo is stuck on the same channel. The driver is sucking himself. Take no notice. You are my family he splurges: executors receivers good sides half backs flankers absorbers potentates contrivers emissaries agitators incarnations lovers leaping onto the tired pile of my flesh.
It is quick it is far it is over it is Forty-five miles long Ten or twenty people there every Sunday It is deep it is low it is out of hand It is a Long Island Ten or twenty thousand every Sunday It is sandy it is full of dead grass There has been no rain but there is Salt water The clock strikes ten. The island is Full of people, drinking beer out of cans And singing very badly. Smoke goes up from the Island, Wind blows the sand away from Ten or twenty thousand good-byes. It was a nice sandy Island. Broken glass Foreheads Putty motes up sawmill lame Post of Father's gate Drop four and I'll tell You the code number Brush Full of topes, Tropes, a kind of New Art on the Blackfingered spool. You put your leg in the water and it bends see you Put your hand in the water and it bends. Trees bend in the sky. You put your hand in the Sky it does not bend, see you Put your leg in the sky, yes, you can bend it. Or not, whichever way you Like it to be in the air. Come on Blackfriars, count your ten fingers in the air Count your ten eyes in the stars. Is that enough? (They stalled in the middle of counting). Come everybody we got to help Johnson We got to help him with his boat and with his Fishing pole, we got to help Johnson out of his House and into the dam boat with his Fishing pole. Come on everybody to the communal sports, Everybody in the water, everybody out of the water, One two three, everybody out of the rain. One man stays out in the rain, Johnson, the indi- Vidualist does not write think or spell like other People, stands in the rain unlike the other. Come on everybody help Johnson back into the house With his boat and his fishing pole, one two three Help him (struggling) through the door (He says he hates the dam house) Come on everybody help Johnson not to be an Individual, one two three help Johnson Back into the bar. Come on everybody it is raining and so we got to Help Johnson.
Corn-colored clouds upon a sky of gold,  And 'mid their sheaves, where, like a daisy-bloom  Left by the reapers to the gathering gloom, The star of twilight flames, as Ruth, 't is told, Dreamed homesick 'mid the harvest fields of old,  The Dusk goes gleaning color and perfume  From Bible slopes of heaven, that illume Her pensive beauty deep in shadows stoled. Hushed is the forest; and blue vale and hill  Are still, save for the brooklet, sleepily  Stumbling the stone with one foam-fluttering foot: Save for the note of one far whippoorwill,  And in my heart   Within a rose, blowing a fairy flute.
Dear child of God With the tears on your face And your hands clasped in anger What is the matter with your race? In the beginning, Father, You made the terms of our survival That we should use our intelligence To kill every rival. The poison of this ferocity Runs in our nature, And O Lord thou knowest How it nourishes thy creatures. Oh what a lively poison it was To bring us to full growth, Is then becoming loving As much as our life is worth? It is a price I would pay To grow loving and kind, The price of my life And the life of human kind. Father in heaven Dear Father of peacefulness It is not often we remember You put this poison in us, Generally we stand With the tears on our face And our hands clasped in anger, Faithful but unfortunate.
I dreamt I could make from the summer A winter childbirth, by turning the slats Of a window to darken a room in Italy. The house was impossibly fragile, made Of cloth and glass, the room floated freely Within itself, and the bed was let into A recess, like a stitch that is slack and loose. My dress was gun-metal grey, with a blow-away Hem: I had saved up my money in an old, Shoulder-length evening glove, and the third And fifteenth of every month were our first meeting, Our first night. Sleep hammered out the days Within the bounds of an hour; I accepted the dream's Standpoint and decision, like a false season. His skin and hair and eyes were cloaked In the warm tones of the day, so he was an Adam Of the young dead of World War One, Or Satan, in the shape of a star-jessamine, Who cursed by name the moon and its perfume. The clouds had space to travel the grey Background of his seven-minute flame, Until the cherry-spotted bed to the right Of the Spanish Steps became A blanket of chance-gathered roses For Keats's first night in the grave. When I thought out my dream, it was some days Old, a cluster of half-rooms with Austrian blinds, And no France; it was the hundredth birthday Of my name grandmother.
I am a woman brought limping to Hell under the Night and Fog decree. But they've let him come here to Belsen, rare passenger in a river-green van, ferried in by an old chauffeur who drives past the howl-choked dogs at the fence. At a shudder of coals, trains unload wide-eyed children, who now flock around him. Yes, he is here, he who, people said, could dissolve bombs in mid-air when he played Beethoven. Now the guards weep as he begins his own Dream of Calliope. The smoke hangs down its arms over the chimneys, clearing the ghost-washed air. Yes, I will soon be on the train with him, rushing along the upper Rhine. But a guard hands him papers, he has done something, no, he must not do something, he leafs through the papers, he must not, what? He is pushed into the van. His gaze runs through my tears, stringing them into a necklace that chokes me as my farewell amplifies in a sudden tunnel of mustard twilight.
blossoming are people nimbler than Really go whirling into gaily white thousands return by millions and dreaming drift hundreds come swimming (Each a keener secret than silence even tells) all the earth has turned to sky are flowers neither why nor how when is now and which is Who and i am you are i am we (pretty twinkle merry bells) Someone has been born everyone is noone dance around the snowman
But evil is a third thing. No, not the ithyphallic demons not even the double Phallus of the devil himself with his key to the two dark doors is evil. Life has its palace of blue day aloft and its halls of the great dark below, and there are the bright doors where souls go gaily in: and there are the dark doors where souls pass silently holding their breath, naked and darkly alone entering into the other communion. There is a double sacredness of doors. Some you may sing through, and all men hear, but others, the dark doors, oh hush! hush! let nobody be about! slip in! go all unseen. But evil, evil is another thing! in another place!
I understand that it is grafting, this partnership of lost wills, common flowers. That only perfection can be kept, not its perfect instances. Snap- dragon what can I expect of you, dress of the occasion? So I am camouflaged, so the handsome bones make me invisible. It is useless. Randomness, the one lost handkerchief at my heart, is the one I dropped and know to look for. Indeed, clues, how partial I am to bleeding hues, to clustering. Almond, stone fruit, you would be a peach, an apricot  but see how close you can come without already being there, the evening pulled in at your waist, slipping over your feet, driving them firmly into place, the warm evening saying Step, anywhere you go is yours, sweet scent in a hurry, to bloom is to be taken completely . White petals, creaseless and ambitious, may I break your even weave, loosen your knot, and if I break you are you mine?
The pastor of grief and dreams guides his flock towards the next field with all his care. He has heard the bell tolling but the sheep are hungry and need the grass, today and every day. Beautiful his patience, his long shadow, the rippling sound of the flock moving along the valley.
I heard, with a street on the edge of town unpaved, my feet and their feet after a little rain just the same color, we are built by weather, you were there, you should know, there is no place that does not make us its own and this line of yours is not your flower and not mine nothing is ours but the saying so we think when we are very young (Rimbaud, Peter Rabbit, when ducks are white and lions reason with their prey) and now we know nothing is ours. Nothing. It is like your father bent over you some summer morning smiling, saying Get up we are going away.
<> Stirred like a little elfish wind the still, Cool lethargy of shaded earth, until Your running voice went like a brown bee humming, Lost under-leaf. Unsummoned, all unwanted, You came and went, until at last I knew My solitude grown populous with you, My warp and woof of sun and shadow haunted. And you have set the plowshare of quick sun Into my languid earth, and you have made A garden to your fancy, straitly laid In patterned rows and ridges, one by one: And I must suffer slow expectancy, Waiting the harvest you have left to me.
Here might have been the thinking of mountains The bright-sad carnival of lovers Roadways of arms raised above watching fields O here is food eat it The water of life drink it For far away is what is real In this terrible room the darkness fills our eyes Only the singing of prisoners that is stopped by walls The stale tapping of victims tears at our flesh In monstrous ovens a devil's feast is readied The food and drink of madmen This is the last supper of all reason and hope Tomorrow is dying here The light of the burial wagons sputters, goes out And at last there is peace
<> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> MONEY OWED HIM. <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> &ldquo; <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <>
&lsquo;Make my voice sharp so it may rise to the clerestories and pierce the ear of the great God. And make my sword sharp to enter into the bowels of God's foes.&rsquo; Forget it. The Middle Ages are over. On a bone altar, with radiation for candle, we make sacrifice to the god of quasars and pulsars, wiping our robotic hands clean on a disposable conscience.
<> On the rock-boned back of the highest thing, That the mountains under me, every one, Are but wrinkled gestures westering, ... Green-robed those little mountains pass Like rabbits under piles of grass. The undelivered sky, vein-ripped in pain Of crackled lightning underneath the skin, Still holds her throbbing thunder-burden in, Too drugged to hate or fear or love the rain. Over the moth-white vapor of hail, Clinging the world where the storm had run, I saw a thousand mountains rise, Where the sun had let me see but one. Indigo-slippered, acre-wide, Curving the mountain meadowside, Walking the silver hill with me, I saw you step in the aspen tree ...
a needlepoint of mischief stirring in the stomach of a dancer lends some surprise a sleek weaving she quivers into swift hoists of toe and climbs of arch in her back so controlled so perfect  an assemblage triumphant with mechanism, commanding order I wish I could catch her slipping for one mill-second see the matrix of her poised leaning broken the condition of her timed-flux interrupted with flurry then I now content with reality would let her brush the moon again.
Fifteen years ago I found my father's in the family attic, so used the shoemaker had to repair it, and I kept it like love until it couldn't be kept anymore. Then my father-in-law died and I got his, almost identical, just the wrong initials embossed in gold. It's forty years old, falling apart, soon there'll be nothing that smells of father-love and that difficulty of living with fathers, but I'd prefer a paper bag to those new briefcases made for men living fast-forward or those attach&eacute; cases that match your raincoat and spring open like a salute and a click of heels. I'm going to put an ad in the paper, &ldquo;Wanted: Old briefcase, accordion style,&rdquo; and I won't care whose father it belonged to if it's brown and the divider keeps things on their proper side. Like an adoption it's sure to feel natural before long  a son without a father, but with this one briefcase carrying a replica comfortably into the future, something for an empty hand, sentimental the way keeping is sentimental, for  <>
The flower that on the pear-tree settles Momentarily as though a butterfly that petal, Has it alighted on the twig's black wet From elsewhere? No, but blossoms from the bole: Not traveller but the tree itself unfolding. What of that stranger in the eyes, the soul? Space-time, our scientists tell us, is impervious. It neither evades nor refuses. It curves As a wave will or a flame whatever's fervent. Space-time has no beginning and no end. It has no door where anything can enter. How break and enter what will only bend? Must there be elsewhere too not merely here  To justify the certainty of miracles? Because we cannot hope or even fear For ghostly coming on the midnight hour, Are there no women's eyes all ardor now And on the tree no momentary flower?
Lightning! Lightning! Lightning! Without thunder! A zaggedy white trombone of lightshot, crackling Between metallic globules, egglike, hugely Aching in the corners of our eyes  The afterburn of electrocuted air Sizzled into our ears and nostrils, halfblinded Us. We reeled into the dim sunshine Groping a little, holding hands, still hearing The confident vibrant voice of the sound system  &lsquo;Harnessed ... power ... unnumbered benefits ...&rsquo; And this we pondered down the bedecked Concourse Of Nations. A gold-robed King of Poland brandished Crossed swords on horseback pedestalled on high; The Soviet Citizen bore his sanguine star Almost as high as that American flag That snaffled in the smart wind perched atop The Amusement Park's live parachute drop. Trapped in antique mores, now the sun Abandoned the International Pavilions To miracles of manmade light. The trees In their pots were underlit, revealing pasty Backsides of their embarrassed leaves. We barked The shins of our puppylove against the crowds That swirled around us, swirled like fallen leaves In the wind's vortex toward the Pool of Fountains: Mauve and yellowing geysers surged and fell As national anthems tolled, amity-wise, From the State of Florida's Spanish Carillon. What portent, in that luminous night to share Undyingly, discovery of each other! Helen, Helen, thy beauty is to me Like those immutable emblems, huge and pure  One glimmering globe the world's will unifying Beside spired hope that ravels the deep skies, Our time's unnumbered benefits descrying In their own light's shimmer, though the new dawn comes With lightning, lightening in a murmur of summer thunder.
I dream my love goes riding out Upon a coal black mare. A cloud of dark all about Her her floating hair. She wears a short green velvet coat. Her blouse is of red silk, Open to her swan like throat, Her breasts white as milk. Her skirt is of green velvet, too, And shows her silken thigh, Purple leather for her shoe, Dark as her blue eye. From her saddle grows a rose. She rides in scented shade. Silver birds sing as she goes This song that she made: &ldquo;My father was a nightingale, My mother a mermaid. Honeyed notes that never fail Upon my lips they laid.&rdquo;
In today's mail a poem quotes from Ecclesiastes: Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might: for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest. A letter with it discloses, in its words and between them, a life opening, fearful, fearless, thousand-eyed, a field of sparks that move swiftly in darkness, to and from a center. He is beginning to live. The threat of world's end is the old threat. <> <> <> the Book of Delight, and: <> <>
<> Above the shell where lustral water lies Deeper than depth of the reflected eyes That are not mortal, I front my death. The liberating hour Is come. I sought and never found reply,  In tortured consciousness and baffled power Forgotten, die. A stranger that has offered to thy heaven Spare vintaging of earth grown wise too late, A watcher of the planets that are seven Turns to thy gate. I strove with beasts, expatriate and lonely. My fault was great, and great mine agony. I never called light darkness. For this only Pray unto thee. At length, before untried abysms cover Insentience, reconciling clod with clod, An instant come to me as to thy lover, Angel of God!
Let every page Begin as clean And end as clear As stories are If actors pass Through pain and grace To make a stage Of any place. Let every word Be prized enough Shyly to talk Or weep with work Or fail afresh Towards a truth That may be heard Beyond its breath. Let every gap And every strip Of space fulfil Its hapless will That all about Each uttered mark The matter drop Into the dark. Let every line In ignorance Of whence it came Or what's to come Hold out its hands Into the breeze As I do mine And cling to these.
Wrote my first poems and an essay on myth at Kent Circle at Kunt Circle there was a Dance Hall there like literally ye Olde West on the spot whar he looked out and saw the sun gleaming on the snow after the St Valentine Day's Storm spring 1940 exactly 300 years writing at the stile before the town age 29 where Cunt Circle was to be where the inverted triangle of the road went around Steep Bank Hill eating packages of peanut butter sandwiches bought from Peter Anastas's Boulevard Sweet Shop the Bridge as far as I chose to go in the February air Went off to New York by the Boston boat as soon as the work was over wearing going through the Canal an Arctic cold weather completely smothering upholstery fabric hair mattress headgear with eyes only protruding until I couldn't stand the god damn thing and went out on deck with my head itself
Awaiting us, it hides, a place apart. The village shops, the school, the almshouses Surround it like a cold grey congregation Who once knew how to pray, and watch in case The place's vital essence should escape. Proximity invites us to survey The church's quiet order and decay. A timbered Tudor porch stands to our right, Incongruously welded to the flat Substantial Norman wall: no one in sight Except a sexton and a resident cat. Inside, we look around, begin to know How little changes where few people go. Tradition too secure for sentiment Is here encased in timber, stone, and glass, To demonstrate that our predicament Is unimportant. Years and tourists pass. It waits behind here, watching us depart. Forgetting us, it hides, a place apart.
Harry Pelleymounter, Day by half-pay day, Served saucepans, fire-lighters, linseed oil Over his father's counter; But hard on shutting-up time He snapped the yale and stayed Alone with the rolled linoleum And made the shop-dusk twang. Harry played Saxophone, piano, Piano-accordion At Christmas party and Saturday hop, While we in the after-homework dark Rang smut-bells, sang &lsquo;Yes, yes, YES, we have no&rsquo;, And clicked ink-smitted fingers At a down-at-heel decade. The crumbling thirties Were fumbled and riddled away; Dirty ten bob coupons Dropped from the pockets of war. And Harry, dumped in the lateral Moraine of middle age, Strummed back the golden dole-days When the boys with never a chance Went without dinner For a tanner for the dance. Now Harry's daughter, Fatherless at fifteen, Is knitting a history thesis Of Millom in between Her youth and Harry's:  Statistics of gas and water Rates, percentage of unemployed, Standard of health enjoyed By the bare-foot children the police ran dances To buy boots for and Harry played. Pulling at threads of the dead years, The minutes taken as read  Spectacled, earnest, unaware That what the Chairman left unsaid, The print in the dried-up throat, the true Breath of the paper bones, once blew Through Harry's soft-hummed, tumbled tunes She never listened to.
We stood by the library. It was an August night. Priests and sisters of hundreds of unsaid creeds passed us going their separate pondered roads. We watched them cross under the corner light. Freights on the edge of town were carrying away flatcars of steel to be made into secret guns; we knew, being human, that they were enemy guns, and we were somehow vowed to poverty. No one stopped or looked long or held out a hand. They were following orders received from hour to hour, so many signals, all strange, from a foreign power: <> At that corner in a flash of lightning we two stood; that glimpse we had will stare through the dark forever: on the poorest roads we would be walkers and beggars, toward some deathless meeting involving a crust of bread.
The stars that open and shut Fall on my shallow breast Like stars on a pool. The soft wind, blowing cool, Laps little crest after crest Of ripples across my breast. And dark grass under my feet Seems to dabble in me Like grass in a brook. Oh, and it is sweet To be all these things, not to be Any more myself. For look, I am weary of myself!
Time is my enemy and my saviour. I have stopped thinking, <> I have stopped imagining a different scene. In the cold black gates of the place where it happened Neptune swims on fiercely, trapped in an iron ocean of time. The bloodstains scrubbed away, the body no more than a few atoms anyone anywhere might inhale. There is no ending to stories of grief. There is no closure. Only the gradual acclimation of the living carved up into different people, their hearts curtained off into solitary shrines, pictures of the loved one hung on nails behind the eyes. The trees of Central Park pop up incongruously from the black heart of the city. Walking anywhere, I might find him again: If I study my hand hard enough, it becomes something else: an instrument of love, not torture. I laid the baby in his crib and tucked the blankets round him while he sobbed, &ldquo;good-bye, good-bye&rdquo; for good night because he didn't want to sleep. The soft curve of his forehead fringed with yellow hair is a bulwark to time  the undeveloped brain, the memory that won't keep either pain or pleasure in its tiny plot. &ldquo;Say good night,&rdquo; I said, not good-bye, the word that never ends. Its long  for the lost one forever saying, I am scared without you, I am lonely. I am missing something since your death. Give it back.
<> The cynic net you cast, The tyranny, the wrong, The ruin, they are past; And here you are at last, Your blood no longer vexed. The coffin has you fast, The clod will have you next. But fear you not the clod, Nor ever doubt the grave: The roses and the sod Will not forswear the wave. The gift the river gave Is now but theirs to cover: The mistress and the slave Are gone now, and the lover. You left the two to find Their own way to the brink Then shall I call you blind?  You chose to plunge and sink. God knows the gall we drink Is not the mead we cry for, Nor was it, I should think  For you a thing to die for. Could we have done the same, Had we been in your place?  This funeral of your name Throws no light on the case. Could we have made the chase, And felt then as you felt?  But what's this on your face, Blue, curious, like a welt? There were some ropes of sand Recorded long ago, But none, I understand, Of water. Is it so? And she she struck the blow, You but a neck behind... You saw the river flow  Still, shall I call you blind?
At Iken Cliff the well-fed tourists gather; caravans, ice-cream, parodies of pleasure drifting irresistibly towards Cliff Reach where moody children mope at the muddy beach; and none thinks to seek for solitude downstream where, framed by trees, St Botolph's church awaits them, gaunt and roofless, unthatched by fire and storm. Decay has overtaken the postcard charm: creepers in the tower challenge the bell-ropes; a builder's sign recalls diminishing hopes outside in the weed-choked churchyard. Iken lies ruined at last after thirteen centuries, echoes the collect for its founder: &lsquo;efface we pray Thee the scars of our wounds and heal us.&rsquo;
1.Before doing what I say, see what I do. 2.Good words are healthy, but deeds are what bring the food, clothe and house the children, and build tomorrows. 3.When one is full, it is easy to criticize the hungry. 4.It is easier to believe than to think. 5.What is increasingly rare among Western people is friendship and caring. 6.Honesty and moral consciousness practiced among the people has a greater impact than sharp-witted demagoguery. 7.Ideas run the world. 8.Force is both an idea and a reality. 9.Children first, which means that family is pre-children. 10.That which is truly valuable cannot be bought. 11.Freedom is only given to people who do not understand it. 12.Greed disguised as need is a great enemy. 13.Do not surround yourself with people who always say yes. 14.Knowledge is non-decaying food, and study brings a vast harvest to those who partake of it. 15.A people that runs from the truth will never know beauty and will sleep with lies. 16.The only ignorant question is the one not asked. 17.One's culture is one's life. 18.Values based upon tradition, reason, and practice are not negotiable and memory is knowledge. 19.Listening is to learning as water is to life. 20.Seeking beauty in relationships is as life-giving as the juice of carrots and the morning sun. There is much more, but let me stop here; brevity is respected.
High in the mountains we stood still after rain, listening to the shaken ice of goat-bells, a blackbird's gold in a carob tree, and breathed wet earth and flowers, garlic, wild thyme and sage that filled the car and lingered in our hair. We met her on the mountain road in wellingtons and a black shawl, her mule laden with something green and aromatic, her silky goats gorged with orchids, a tattered little flock of ewes and black-eyed lambs, strange tribe migrating at the day's end. The cave is dark tonight, the Easter candles out and Judas burnt, the psalms are over, priestly magnificence disrobed, the bull's each step a moonstone on the sea, Europa ravished. And Katerina and her Gyorgios are folded back to limestone, like the gods.
<> June air and ivy on thy gracile stone, O glory of the west, as thou wert sown Be perfect: O miraculous, abide! And still for greatness floating from thy side, Eternal alchemist, upraise, enthrone Some presence of salvation, later blown From that same seed of fire which never died. <> Staunch, to the morrow's hostile evil verge, New points of light subdue disclosing spaces; And round a beacon-spirit, stabile, old, In radiant broad tumultuary surge For ever, the young voices, the young faces.
Where malady has winnowed him already, Sinking over the ribs into transparence, He nourishes the foetus of symmetry: Crupper and taut withers subside over bones, Tail sheds the spent wave. But on two hooves he would Fly, foreshank rising, rear shattering its prance To cleave the grass of a gone summer. His head Stoops, he studies the hoof he would lift higher, And the hoof he cannot lift at all, beside; Caught fetlock, the conundrum itself a door To clarification. His separate eyes Protrude to gauge it, his ears slant down to snare Or brush it in passage, and they frame that place Where the ball has entered cleanly. They would shut Trim as the leather lip, they would shield those eyes Budding like horns incalculable velvet Of the next moment, whose furlongs he has seen Already, whose grass he has felt simmer at His knees, running into that shadeless season He would crest once more, rearing beneath lightness.
The damned ship lurched and slithered. Quiet and   quick  My cold gorge rose; the long sea rolled; I knew I must think hard of something, or be sick;  And could think hard of only one thing  You, you alone could hold my fancy ever!  And with you memories come, sharp pain, and   dole. Now there's a choice heartache or tortured liver!  A sea-sick body, or a you-sick soul! Do I forget you? Retchings twist and tie me,  Old meat, good meals, brown gobbets, up I throw. Do I remember? Acrid return and slimy,  The sobs and slobber of a last year's woe. And still the sick ship rolls. 'Tis hard, I tell ye, To choose 'twixt love and nausea, heart and belly.
A year passes behind me.Shadows grow larger.Time dissolves to a moment.I look to my children.They change.A smile, a brush of the lips against my heart;things brighten and vanish into a kind of joy, a kind of light. Chaos began us, war in my own time, war in my children's time, irrevocable accusation!I have heard the music of the sounds of peace: music of rivers, of street-corners, of our South, blues, harvest-songs;and in the faces of lovers seen all our challenge shining as a sign to shape the future in love and birth. Women standing in their houses set around with order  the bread, the doorways and tables of everyday living through all the walls have heard the shouts of fighting, planes in the air, and a shrill cry of women tortured under time, each one carrying loss like conception:a lover gone, or a son, or her brothers disappeared.One saying, &ldquo;Spain!Spain!&rdquo; One desolate for her unborn children.One standing alone outside of lighted windows, or black against raving fires of this year and next year. Chaos began us, a people skillful in war, young in love, and in peace unbegun.A people various as life whose strength is in our many voices and our hope of a future of many, each singing his own song. For we know this struggle:more than forces in conflict, we know it as always the rising changing shadow of a dream. A woman moving in my own house among my daughters, I remember their hands when they were little, and smoothing their shining hair.They change.And one will have her child. The year passes.Around me chaos grows. And darkly our time renews itself.And equilibrium, the healer, the young one, the beginning of new life, poises itself on war.And life moves in its sharpened color into another year. As I grow old, I face the strange seasons, I rejoice in the young, and I say, in suffering, in joy, among the marvelous changes, among the accusations, all things glow.
It is not yet the grey and frosty time When barns ride out of the night like ships: We do not see the Brothers, bearing lanterns, Sink in the quiet mist, As various as the spirits who, with lamps, are sent To search our souls' Jerusalems Until our houses are at rest And minds enfold the Word, our Guest. Praises and canticles anticipate Each day the singing bells that wake the sun, But now our psalmody is done. Our hasting souls outstrip the day: Now, before dawn, they have their noon. The Truth that transsubstantiates the body's night Has made our minds His temple-tent: Open the secret eye of faith And drink these deeps of invisible light. The weak walls Of the world fall And heaven, in floods, comes pouring in: Sink from your shallows, soul, into eternity, And slake your wonder at that deep-lake spring. We touch the rays we cannot see, We feel the light that seems to sing. Go back to bed, red sun, you are too late, And hide behind Mount Olivet  For like the flying moon, held prisoner, Within the branches of a juniper, So in the cages of consciousness The Dove of God is prisoner yet: Unruly sun, go back to bed. But now the lances of the morning Fire all their gold against the steeple and the water-tower. Returning to the windows of our deep abode of peace, Emerging at our conscious doors We find our souls all soaked in grace, like Gideon's fleece.
The seasons revolve and the years change With no assistance or supervision. The moon, without taking thought, Moves in its cycle, full, crescent, and full. The white moon enters the heart of the river; The air is drugged with azalea blossoms; Deep in the night a pine cone falls; Our campfire dies out in the empty mountains. The sharp stars flicker in the tremulous branches; The lake is black, bottomless in the crystalline night; High in the sky the Northern Crown Is cut in half by the dim summit of a snow peak. O heart, heart, so singularly Intransigent and corruptible, Here we lie entranced by the starlit water, And moments that should each last forever Slide unconsciously by us like water.
To whom do the bass pay homage, Leaping to break the dimness Of the reedy, dawn-gray water? I heard the rare message From Sirius and Capella, The Dog-Star and the Goat, Whom I saw as I rode to this water Over the empty streets And the houses cold with dream. They have paled into the sunlight That whitens the upper air, But they say still: &ldquo;Come, &ldquo;We are the great fireflies, Sweeter than soft minnows. Take us before we fade.&rdquo; And the shape with the whispering lure, The dark shape with the net, Draws them to that shore.
There was a blacksmith in my breast, That worked the bellows of my chest  And hammer of my heart, As up the heavy scree I pressed,  Making the loose stones scream, crag-echoes start. Rocks, rising, showed that they were sheep, But one remained as though asleep,  And how it was I saw, When loath to leave the huddled heap  A hoodie crow rose up with angry craw. Though stiller than a stone it lay, The face with skin half-flayed away  And precious jewels gone, The eye-pits darted a dark ray  That searched me to my shadowy skeleton.
There's a grand old dance that's rockin the nation Shake your money and shut your mouth Taking the place of copulation S'called The Bourgeois. See that girl with the diamond thing? Shake your money and shut your mouth Didn't get that by picketing She done The Bourgeois. Do-gooder, do-gooder where you been? Shake your money and shut your mouth Done myself good, got a medal from the Queen For The Bourgeois.  Is it a singer? No.  Is it a lover? No.  Is it a bourgeois? Yeaaah! Wave your missile around the vault Shake your money and shut your mouth Somebody suffers well it ain't your fault That you're Bourgeois. I play golf so I exist Shake your money and shut your mouth Eye on the ball and hand over fist I do The Bourgeois. Five days a week on the nine-eleven Shake your money and shut your mouth When we die we'll go to Bournemouth Cos we're Bourgeois.
Sweat, wicked kissers, in your stark Hate of the whitewashed day; By the queen-swarm of a breast Where lolls a honeycombing hand No peeping constellations may Eavesdrop upon you as you clip Each other in old Adam's nest, And in an evening silvered cup Love's upspringing sunrise catch Till the winged bloodhorses of sex Dead heat, and meet their match. No, never lift those heavy eyes (Like mirrors opposite they view Two whole advancing worlds of two) For that inspector with a sword Outside your bedroom keeping guard Who mistakes for a sadder place The sacred bed and garden of Your permissible embrace. Across the globe from Africa To New Zealand you have bent The rainbow of your sacrament And promise of a Milky Way, Under whose nuptial arch so many  Folk and flower, fish and beast  Would shelter, if they only could, From afflictions not understood, Till half the world curled up like any Babe against your threefold breast. And yet your bed is full enough When empty of all things except Two who erect their house of love On the dark spot where Adam wept. But let no poison of the veins Shake an Egyptian skeleton  These two in one another's chains Labouring under Helicon Prove that who loses also gains The love that takes a world of pains.
Staring up from his pram to the sky  through mobile leaves that so transfixed him, no matter who smiled  and cooed, whose head might suddenly block his light, those sea-washed eyes  that had never yet seen sea wouldn't flinch, barely blinked  and when at last they panned from tree to you, it would seem as if  time itself had been scanned so slowly did sight catch up with vision  vision give way to a human hold. And though he'd sit for hours, tearless  and wide awake, you'd lift him shoulder him with kisses, words, any  bauble waved like a flag to bring it home to him, him home to you.  But even his eyelashes, so long and straight, channelled his gaze  outwards and onwards and irises so light, so green, implied nothing  but light behind them, as if his mind had fled to the back of his skull  and bled every shadowy lobe. As you carried him in to a sunless  hall, behind your back, were those eyes trained down on a lane  where the pram still stood? A white sheet rumpled, an awning  of leaves shadowed on sheet and hood. As you shifted his weight  and revolved to the door between him and the light, did something  pass like a tryst, deferred drawn up through those eyes to a sky  he was saying goodbye to?
There may we learn at daybreak and nightfall,  As day and dusk and darkness cover us,  With earth and sky and the omniverous  Infinite sea of ceaseless flood and fall,  There may we learn how love is spiritual  And death divine and life illustrious,  There may we find at last the fabulous  Truth and compose the soul's high ritual. There may we haply find ourselves, the goal,  Ourselves, the source of all enlightenment,  And thus discern how earth and sky and sea And love and life and death and destiny  Are wrought of one eternal element  Quarried in dim deep strata of the Soul.
In a twinkling, the green of this Belgrade backstreet hotel window burns impressions on my world-weary eyes in colors that dazzle but only because the reds &amp; blues &amp; aquamarines of the pantyhose the young women wear seems so alive in the midst of all this gray, solid officialdom of unmuted light. I watch the old women hanging out wash to dry in late morning sunlight about to turn shadowy in the September that can only become another October, my month of solitudinous love. Lost like this, in another world, I grab at anything, any language to make myself understood by these beautiful people whom a taxi driver told me this afternoon are, like the languages they speak, so unsimple, maybe complicated. There is the small electrical power plant to my left as I lean like moonlight, my head out the window to listen to traffic in Slavic. But there is also further left the uphill grind of traffic &amp; waiting bus stop citizens who, when the dark green &amp; dusty silver-topped bus arrives, will suddenly become paying passengers clutching their sweaty dinars &amp; waiting, always waiting for the right stop to pop or drop them into another curve or sudden swerve of this moving moment; this endless now that is forever becoming something else again. The peasant woman in a pink dress who smokes &amp; smokes like all Yugoslavs everywhere seems to be watching me from a block away. We're really each other &amp;, as she leans on the backs of her legs &amp; huffs &amp; puffs, I can indeed see myself in her: a sultry Slav, a Balkan with that Asian-Mediterranean primal pigmentation defining me for centuries to come. All this &amp; a sudden folksong duet as well, floating up from the street momentarily in living color.
Old fir young fir afternoon indiscriminate cloudy hard to time stop the car on dirt road stretch head towards the sound of river oblivious still from the high way speed sweet sound of river incessant rising through my ears eyes I'm clear across the clearing before I know the wind is rising in the branches not the river very cold wind very dry no grass or undergrowth young pine sparse between old pine dead branches all the way across a path I had been crushing riblike winter-polished twigs bone dry
The woman are wearing britches now; You can't tell one from the other. She's tumbled down from her lofty throne To man, down in the gutter. There she's smoking, drinking, gambling, The world stands aghast, chagrined, The human race is turning backward, And is on the downward trend. The winding circle of cigar's smoke Doesn't measure the height of manhood's yoke, Nor can a filthy cigarette butt Elevate a woman out of the rut. Woman, who's upheld the moral code During all the centuries past, Has turned things topsy turvy, And the world stands by aghast. The child is born from a cigarette body, Its first caresses from a lip soaked tardy. As goes woman, so go morals. Where is the race to get its laurels? Oh! If I had a voice, a persuasive voice, I'd penetrate the heart of woman And show her how this moral world Is hanging now upon her omen. O woman, have you any heart, And did you ever sigh? And did your senses ever start At the future's wailing cry? O woman, won't you help us To pray to your Almighty God To help remove this stumbling block Ere we it all absorb? O woman, just for childhood's sake With one good hearty throb, Won't you help us pray one prayer To your Almighty God? O God! give us a little faith, And into this darkness That's getting deeper every day, Oh, send a light of rest! All hopes deal with the future, Lord, We hope for better days, And while we're drifting down the tide, Show us the right way. Laurels of this world are sweet, But they soon pass away. The child's laurels are dark right now. Can't we brighten the forthcoming days?
Officially they do not acknowledge this god. Officially they honour assorted immortals In stone buildings with pioneering roofs. Their houses betray them. Above ceilings, Tanks for the precious stuff. Below, a shrine To the godhead. Here they may stand alone In confessional boxes, or lie full length In his hollow bed, singing. Here he sometimes speaks In loud, disquieting, oracular tones. Fish are considered holy; where they go We found contemplatives, with green umbrellas, Making symbolic gestures at the stream. In the hot month they consecrate their gardens With a wet rite involving children, rubber, dogs. On Sunday mornings they lustrate the car. They pretend to disparage the god and his rainy gift, Using set litanies:  <> (Black comedy is native to this people). Daylong, nightlong, ministers of the god Recite on different airways his moods and intentions. The people claim not to believe. But they listen. Their literature is great. They never read it. <> Line they can quote, Though ignorant of the context, They reckon these words cover everything.
The raven flew above the screes, above the rocks, Where the bare bones of the mountain broke through the skin, And rain trickled to the black tarn, and lichen Grew like gangrene on the splintered knuckles. The raven flew down the long wedge of the dale, Above the upland dykes and slate and cobble walls Piled against the high waves of the fells. With slower corrugations of its wings It dropped below the bracken cut for bedding To where green oats were sown on the brant fell, And the lyle herdwicks fed in the wet pastures For the grass was thicker there and orchids and burnet grew. The raven suddenly stepped steeply up the air Seeing a man sitting beside the beck, An old man with a beard white as may. The green Water wound like bindweed round the rocks, And burst into buds and elderflowers of foam; Rowans and hawthorns creamed and bubbled with blossom And splashed their petals on the old man's head, Who felt them not at all nor the thin white rain. The raven soared on a lifting wind And flew to the farm beyond the mosses, Dropped like a hawk to the stackyard, scared The fowls with a thick black beak, and snatched the bread Which the farmer's wife had scattered. It flew to the dale And dropped the bread to the man, who dipped it in the water, And ate it like a sop. The raven flew away Knowing no reason nor questioning, knowing neither The man's face nor his name, for there was never a place For names in the brain of a raven, 'though its eyes Were a dove's eyes in a black corvine head.
O Luck, A when? you twinkling fuse of here and now, sometimes called Grace a world  I am not much in pain, not much afraid, I am not guilty and I am not damned, nor even bored, but I am simply bawling for want of you, wing'd Opportunity. Nor am I envious: I do have virtues of which I reap or shall the slow-come prizes (though I complain), even the cider breeze of Fame by which I tingle may yet blow my patient way. My character endures, my destiny will not be accidental, and common reason must prevail at last  but when? when? when shall I awake to a morning quick and can what I want. Long I labored to make me Goodman, did it in despite of pleasure and prudence, to my surprise that face fits me, force flows from me with effortless ease, my hunch hits home, my whimsy works, my rebel bluff says a relevant speech, what I meant in malice my neighbor needs, and grateful foreigners offer me gifts, only a luck of my own I lack, only a task to wake up toward. O Opportunity! do come my way in such a guise, glancing one, that I may know you, for long study has estranged me from the common uses, but appear in a likely shape, sexy, operable, and whether I will or no imperious. For lately wary of my self I lay within the world like the long trill on B in the Sonata in the key of E, and Day crowded my room! the furniture that yesterday had climbed upstairs climbed out, the house itself fell down, and common day was my raw banner flying but O Luck, when? when? for I am simply baffled by want of you, wing'd Opportunity, O winged Opportunity to squander myself and live again among the months my kinsmen, we were born in the same womb I knew them well, how we grew strong together and broke at last into the common light, yes rough March is my brother and sweet May and June and hot July and all of them.
You have made God small, setting him astride a pipette or a retort studying the bubbles, absorbed in an experiment that will come to nothing. I think of him rather as an enormous owl abroad in the shadows, brushing me sometimes with his wing so the blood in my veins freezes, able to find his way from one soul to another because he can see in the dark. I have heard him crooning to himself, so that almost I could believe in angels, those feathered overtones in love's rafters, I have heard him scream, too, fastening his talons in his great adversary, or in some lesser denizen, maybe, like you or me.
are the desolate, dark weeks when nature in its barrenness equals the stupidity of man. The year plunges into night and the heart plunges lower than night to an empty, windswept place without sun, stars or moon but a peculiar light as of thought that spins a dark fire  whirling upon itself until, in the cold, it kindles to make a man aware of nothing that he knows, not loneliness itself Not a ghost but would be embraced emptiness, despair (They whine and whistle) among the flashes and booms of war; houses of whose rooms the cold is greater than can be thought, the people gone that we loved, the beds lying empty, the couches damp, the chairs unused  Hide it away somewhere out of the mind, let it get roots and grow, unrelated to jealous ears and eyes for itself. In this mine they come to dig all. Is this the counterfoil to sweetest music? The source of poetry that seeing the clock stopped, says, The clock has stopped that ticked yesterday so well? and hears the sound of lakewater splashing that is now stone.
SNOW cru is ingw Hi sperf ul lydesc BYS FLUTTERFULLY IF (endbegi ndesginb ecend)tang lesp ang le s ofC omeg o CRINGE WITHS lilt( -ing- lyful of)! (s r BIRDS BECAUSE AGAINS emarkable s)h? y &amp; a (from n o(into whe)re f ind) nd ArE GLIB SCARCELYEST AMONGS FLOWERING
If you have seen a single yellow iris standing watch beside the garden, then you have seen the Major General weeping at four in the morning in his mother's Bible; and if you have seen the rows and rows of onions, then you have seen the army with its shoes half off and its rifles half stacked and half scattered in the witch hazel. But you who have seen the half-eaten leaves of the hackberry have seen the saddest sight of all, a nest inside a ruined building, a father hugging his child, a Jew in Vilna. You would have to sit at my bedroom window to see the dog of hay guarding the strawberries. He is twice the size of an Irish wolfhound and heavier than a bear. He belongs to the hairy species with the sheepdog and the long-nosed collie. He lies there day after day in the middle of the garden with his paws crossed under his chin and his eyes watching the road. He is so clean-smelling and so peaceful that we forget the strength in his huge body and the malice in his jaws. I have to lie on my back for two hours before a certain cloud comes by; then I only have three or four good seconds before it disappears again for another day. What would it have been like if there had been no maples and no viburnum to cut off my vision, if I could have lived all year in the sand with nothing to stop me but my own thoughts, if I could have let my eye go freely down the line choosing its own movement and its own light?
&ldquo;Be tolerant,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;of all but bores, Hostile only to indifference. Creative and a hero if you can Or know the odds and choose a useful job. Be rooted in the liberties of mind, Swear on fire, water, earth and wind, Fear the chase of cash that comes by chance, And knowledge if it does not move the heart. Taste the wide variety of things, Uncertainties, incompatibilities, And listen to no argument that fails To push you out to sea or back to port. Do not try to live unchangeably, The Saragosa Sea is quiet But they call it dead, in the desert There is only sand and a sordid thirst.&rdquo; And then I watched him die and turned away, Could not save him, merely had my say.
Mystery man, with enigmatic eyes, who are you and what do you want? I learn no more by putting on my glasses  if it takes away the illusion of good looks, it only magnifies the ravages. Is this what the world sees? Curious symptom of aging, the red nose. Hard to recognize myself. With this face, I could be in one of those drab, prewar British movies where the husband, a clerk, comes home from work to find his wife having an affair with another dreary bloke I could play him too  and after the sordid confrontation on the linoleum, sits at the kitchen table, head in hands under the lightbulb. Staring into my eyes, I glimpse a robed nomad halted on a desert ridge, his tribal face surveying like a hawk the treeless horizon, days from any waterhole. Or in a cheap gray suit and tieless shirt, I've just been released after serving time, for molesting children, or embezzling perhaps, and with all my possessions wrapped in a paper bag under my arm, walk skid row. Or I could be an Irish workingman, unemployed since the mill shut down, looking straight at the camera under the brim of my cloth cap, grim-jawed and illusionless. One thing is clear: I've seen hell and it shows.
I dreamed last night once more I stood  Knee-deep on purple clover leas; Her old home glimmered through its wood  Of dark and melancholy trees:  And on my brow I felt the breeze That blew from out the solitude, With sounds of waters that pursued,  And sleepy hummings of the bees. And ankle-deep in violet blooms  Methought I saw her standing there, A lawny light among the glooms,  A crown of sunlight on her hair;  The wood-birds, warbling everywhere, Above her head flashed happy plumes; About her clung the wild perfumes,  And woodland gleams of shimmering air. And then she called me: in my ears  Her voice was music; and it led My sad soul back with all its fears;  Recalled my spirit that had fled.   And in my dream it seemed she said, &ldquo;Our hearts keep true through all the years;&rdquo; And on my face I felt the tears,  The blinding tears of her long dead.
It's a classic American scene  a car stopped off the road and a man trying to repair it. The woman who stays in the car in the classic American scene stares back at the freeway traffic. They look surprised, and ashamed to be so helpless... let down in the middle of the road! To think that their car would do this! They look like mountain people whose son has gone against the law. But every night they set out food and the robber goes skulking back to the trees. That's how it is with the car... it's theirs, they're stuck with it. Now they know what it's like to sit and see the world go whizzing by. In the fume of carbon monoxide and dust they are not such good Americans as they thought they were. The feeling of being left out through no fault of your own, is common. That's why I say, an American classic.
This is how I bend over backward to tie my shoes, I blink across the night romancandle. An omnibuzz, like typing on my tongue. I want to sleep on these blank pages. I shake this match and it won't go out, a kamikaze blown in on a breeze. I can't sleep brushing you. Unbone my hand, early warning. Unbone this cloud, possible showers. Self is to be commended for correct adult deportment at self's recent funeral (except for ignoring the no-smoking sign). Pass the sweet, Salty, it is morning: the streets are tilted and rocky, a newborn foundling has pinned its mother with barely a whimper Can't we discuss this on the phone? A shot is fired next door, miss the cat? Will those few please sit up and speak to me; otherwise I'm forced to conclude  <>
Now the English larks are singing, And the English meadows flinging Scarlet flags of blazing poppies to the fragrant summer air, And from every tower and steeple All the wondering English people Hear a chime of fairy music, though no bell-ringers are there. What has caused this jubilation? Days ago the coronation Went with jewelled pomp and splendour to the country of the past. Is the land some Saint's day hailing? Or has some tall ship gone sailing Through the hostile fleet to triumph, with the Union at her mast? Nay, it is no war-like glory, Nor pale saint, of ancient story, That has made the island blossom into beauty rare and new. We in this sea-severed nation, Share with England our elation, As we keep this feast, your birthday, and are glad with love for you!
Wet black pavements in the dripping of the rain  Wet black pavements are mirroring plain Magic of colors that spangle the night, Magic of colors when, spilling light, Signs are brandishing torches bold And blazing windows burst with gold, When strings of trolleys, that lazily sprawl, Like flaming yellow caterpillars crawl. And so I wander and marvel to see Streets, thick-lacquered with witchery In shimmer of flagstone and asphalt's gleams Burn like a Grand-Bazaar of Dreams.... Then as I move in the sleek, black night, Chameleon-flagstones, seething bright, Smoulder and sizzle with misty gold; Till it seems that the pavements hold Glimmering galleons and treasure-ships That blaze with disaster which spurts and drips.... Soon as the galleons drown and fill, Out of their tar-black fissures spill,  Out of gaping cracks in their hulks, Ingots and topazes of dazzling bulks, That, spooling forth a sulphurous track, Smoke in waters of velvet-black.... <> <> <> <>
My bones taste of carbonate of lime. Take your fill. My mother is suet, bread, raisins. Bring me down to her body and I will sing. I will feed and sing of earth as my mother waits in her lowered berth. <> I'll sing for her. My bones sway dunked in carbonate of lime. Careful, should they spill. My mother is suet, bread, raisins. In her coffin the carnal digression begins. She rounds and shrinks in phases, dutiful: now gibbous, now crescent, now full. <> I sing to her. My bones still taste of carbonate of lime. They always will. Come taste my bones. I'll hold them very still.
&lsquo;Who gives this woman to this man?&rsquo; The parson asks, and one man can, According to the liturgy, Rightly reply. And many more, If saying &lsquo;I do&rsquo; were the door To show their daughters out, would say It now and twenty times a day. But with &lsquo;I do&rsquo; or merely &lsquo;Me&rsquo;, Failing the Prayer Book's nudge, who'd claim Just cause or just justification To dare the pride of giving? Let Church and choir and congregation Silent remain and the reply Come from some other than the &lsquo;I&rsquo; That hesitates at &lsquo;Do&rsquo;. The wind Might say; &lsquo;I gave her breath&rsquo;; the sky: &lsquo;I gave the light to see her by&rsquo;; Soil and humus, stem and stone: &lsquo;We gave the calcium for the bone, Carbohydrates, minerals, those Hormones and genes and chromosomes That chose her sex and shaped her nose&rsquo;. Water might lap and lip: &lsquo;From me Venus was born, so why not she?&rsquo; But neither earth nor sky nor water Speak sponsorship for this their daughter. So in the eternity before &lsquo;I do&rsquo; is done, and while the air Waits on the Prayer Book's questionnaire, Let silence ring its loud reply: &lsquo;She gives herself what can a man ask more?&rsquo;
<> And muttered whisperings of conspiracy: Deep in the west a flicker of ominous light, As if a torch had signaled suddenly; Involving heaven and earth in anarchy: Then, high above the world, vast wings in flight And trumpet-thunder of Night's empery.  Chaos and Night, form upon demon form,  Riding the exultation of the storm. Glimmer; and rumors of confederate Dawn: Aerial tumult as of sylphid feet: Far ranks of radiance, on the peaks withdrawn, Confronting Darkness, who, in wild retreat, Flies from the leveled glory, fiery beat Of swords about a golden gonfalon, And sapphire shields, and spears of blinding heat.  Light, and its ordered cohorts, ray on ray, And the fierce phalanx of resistless Day.
 Who're you with? Boxers. What?  There's something going on here. Still can't hear you.  Boxers. Look this is impossible, what did you say?  There was a storm last night all night you know.  What's that? What's torn? Wires down up-by. But that's not what you hear here. What? Where?  Here. It's the sparring. What's that I keep hearing?  I just told you. Boxers. There's one word you keep using. Did you hear that crash? That was the table, they're spry as cats. I gave them steaks and the end of the wine. Sleep? Not them. Up at each other the four of them like what's that you say?  You said cats. What cats? Where are the cats?  Cats? I'm not speaking about cats. Boxers.  There it is, there's that word. I bet you can hear them, they've started to sing. Some harmony. Two with belts and two with braces. I'll have to put them up. Pull what up?  Yes, put the lot up. One in your bed since you're stuck in Croy, one on the couch, one in the collapsible thing, and one on two chairs. Of course I'm in Croy, where did you think I was? Yes. What?  Try the line tomorrow, give me a ring. I'm off to make coffee for those clowns.  What was that? I'm not having clowns! Harry, you'll not put a clown in my bed.  I'm not putting clowns in anybody's bed. There's not a clown here. Harry, are you drunk?  Look I must go, they're swinging on the pulley.  Overseas telegrams, can I help you? Linda!
<> And whether fear or hate is uppermost They know a lovely and a troubled ghost Walks in man's mind, and urges him apart To dream of her. All women long have known When true love turns to them with happy cries, The gleam of Helen flickers in the eyes That see the gleam of Helen in their own. And when man says to woman, &ldquo;You are fair!&rdquo; She knows the measure of her loveliness, The universal standard she can guess What fragile hand he sees, what golden hair! Helen, despised of woman, is the glass Where she may glimmer for a time, and pass.
Come close. Let me whisper. You know the changeling in the manger. Those limbs  pistons. That smile that had the polish of the machine, lubricating their gifts. They crucified the wrong one found wandering in the country, babbling of love and truthfulness ... no down for his bed. While the other one made for the town, persuading the people; filling Calvary with its derision; knowing the new travellers in time would arrive too speedily to have grown wise on the way.
Each dawn we watch the bus descend through lifting mist, come shining down an emerging hill's decline to the sea. We mount its trembling steps, feed the chattering meter quarters, sit, begin to sleep but first sway round our brightly curved tidal bay, begin the lifting road up through the hillside pastures, passing every day the dewdrenched buckskin mare who comes to lean against the leaning fence and stare as, from our serial windows, we stare back before we enter the city dreaming of horses.
Outside the long window of the final poem  The final poem, like an empty room, a high Room of state Where burns the last of the perpetual fires: A guttering tongue of the ancient flame, Or mother-word of the unutterable name Faltering In a sealed air, in the night, and unknown weather  A starved moth of a cry, a moth or cry Of the soul, or soul batters its wings Against the transparent gate of the final room  The dark room of the longest art where burns Fame of the word that is mother of the cry And desire of the heart, The term or a form of the nurturing light I am drawn to as by fate Unsealed in a dream when I first remembered To fly And felt the lapse and glide and the strong sexual Rising of sight, And gazed upon the diminished fields of the world Without fold or flower, as from the tower Of an ecstasy ... Until night came down bearing laws And I awoke, and saw far off through the black The thin flame of the mother-word; and heard The calling of a name From the sealed mansion of the book  The final poem and the adamantine lock.
Of all the winsome damsels, that my eyes have ever seen,  There is one, for whom my breast heaves constant sighs: She is a handsome lady, she is to me a queen;  And I of Cupid begged his noose to catch the prize. To me she is so comely, the fairest maid around,  Yes her voice is like the curlews of the spring; Her ebon locks are curly, her cheeks are olive brown,  And her songs of music charm me when she sings. The smiles that ever lingers, upon her winsome face,  Reflects like glit'ring rain-bow tints around; My heart oft leaps with gladness, when through that smile I trace,  A love concealed, by hidden blushes bound. Her laugh, I can't describe it, 'tis far beyond compare;  But it sounds like rippling waters I have heard; Or the flow of some sweet cadence, on the tranquil even air;  Mingled with the gentle warble of a bird. Although there're many a damsel, I find them all amiss;  Compared with her my lady love, Irene; There is none whose smile possess me, with that sweet angelic bliss:  There is none, for she's my chosen queen.
Over my desk Georgia O'Keeffe says <> takes refuge in the disembodied third person singular:  <> <> O Georgia! Sashaying between first base and shortstop as it were drawing up a list of all the things <> <> <> <> Syntax, like sex, is intimate. One doesn't lightly leap from person to person.  <> <> <> O awkward invisible third person, come out, stand up, be heard! Poetry is like farming. It's a calling, it needs constancy, the deep woods drumming of the grouse, and long life, like Georgia's, who is talking to one, talking to me, talking to you.
The cold day waking and March wind against us  There, there I saw him at an open door, A shaft of Sun within an empty portal, The old man looking as he must have been A half century ago. I was conscious only That his body shone beneath a blue-lined cloak, That his limbs moved as with the quickened lightness Of white invisible fires. &lsquo;I have come from sleep,&rsquo; He said, &lsquo;shaking long winters from me, Eons of chaos filled with blood-stained comets And falling moons, black tempests and grey floods, No stars, but nights with storm-ringed mountain-tops Where lightning flared green arrows among clouds.&rsquo; He spread his luminous hands and smiled at us: &lsquo;The while I slept, I heard a statesman say, <> And after him, I heard sleek magpies chatter, <> A coiled snake eat them, and I heard boughs fall.&rsquo; &lsquo;Let the Years sleep,&rsquo; he said, &lsquo;in that locked room Behind me, in the dwindling shadows Of an unmade bed, in sheets, in crevices O f floor and wall. Today we breathe the Sun Raised through the skies, that Persian draught of heaven.&rsquo; That was the last I heard. He had disappeared: The world was Spring, a flowering equinox  Behind him came white violets in the grass.
<> We might have mused upon in other days,  If out of heaven to resounding ways Thou fleddest what the wrath of gods might chance, If deeply jewelled in five-pointed dance Outstayed sea-crowning of Calypso's praise, Or lost when Pleiads swam the ocean maze. Yet thanks to science' infinite romance We know exactly now why thou art here; The oyster-bed preceding, like a bow Thou comest curved and ready, even so, With belly turned to suck the oysters near, Which great and small the varied reasons are Why thou art here, ethereal little star!
Let us go to the Animal Ball, disguised as bipeds! And the first man down on all fours, pays for the drinks! Stan has a cocker that can walk on his hind legs, too: We'll take him along, to support us when the spirit sinks. We've walked on our hind-legs now so many ages, We're hoof to the knee, and hock to the hip, but still  How hot the feet get when you've only two to hit the ground with! It takes real nerve to walk erect, and a pretty strong will. We went too far when we put on the fur of lynxes, Of weasels trapped in winter when they've lost their tan; We went too far when we let the fox assist us To warm the hide that houses the soul of Man. The reek of the leopard and the stink of the inky cat Striped handsomely with white, are in the concert hall; We sleekly writhe from under them, and are above all that: But, the concert over, back into our pelts we crawl. &ldquo;It is bad to let the dog taste leather.&rdquo;
&lsquo;I gave him an  Masonic handshake: holding his fingers As if they still were sticky from the royal touch. And I, at an upstairs window (the afternoon Raining down on the Square, the Holborn Hill Brass  Bandsmen Blowing the water out of their tubas) watched His Royal Highness conducted through the puddles To my father's brotherly clasp. Out in the wet, Beside the broken billboards and the derelict joiner's yard, Two hundred primary scholars soaked and cheered, Unseeing and unseen. At five o'clock that morning We'd climbed the Jubilee Hill in the drizzling forelight To view, in ninety-nine per cent eclipse, a sun That never rose at all. The smoke from early fires Seeped inconspicuously into the mist; the 5.30 Ironworks buzzer boomed out like a fog-horn. Click, On the nick of the clock, the calculated dawn Shied back on itself, birds knocked off shouting, And the light went home to roost. Two minutes later The twist of the globe turned up the dimmer And day began again to try to begin. It rained, On and off, for eleven hours, but I Dry in my window-seat, the sun still in eclipse, Squinted at the prince through candle-kippered glasses, Too young to be disappointed, too old to cheer  Universe and dynasty poised on the tip of one parish  Eager at last, for  And my father's now royally contagious hand.
And I would have you clad like dominoes In every stripe and lozenge you would dare, A gauged discord, irregular and clair, Or corsleted in ribands like a beau. Be armed by shells, those profits of the Sound, As slippered like a prince in modesty You softly fly the docks as coarse sail cloth Swelled by the wind and sailing bluely north. O jacketed like jockeys in a silk! I'd have you rayed and tangled in douce ropes Where hawsers found their ships at captive ports. Odor of fur, a belle cool din! Till when the shock of some dark pose Makes leapt commotion like a white furore Of one wave, only one wave seen Raging on the night-paned seas Or as the Spring unwinds the flood Or as a perfume galls the scrupled blood And you have yoked me till I cannot break Though broken I as uncouth horsemen might Bully a spirit to its brink. And your very name its lips make weights in me.
I am telling you this: the tubes in your nose, in the esophagus, in the stomach; the small balloon attached to its end is your bleeding gullet; yellow in the canned sunshine of gauze, stitching, bedsores, each tactoe cut sewn back is America: I am telling you this: <>
O starry temple of unvaulted space, And floor unbounded, built of just desire, Not reared up by pillars straining spire, For whither should it rise without a base, Or whither should it fall, whose terms and space Is God himself? When shall my soul aspire To hear the music of thy heavenly choir, And bear a part of that melodious grace? Whereas apostles, martyrs and confessors, Archangels, angels, virgins and professors, Do make a consort of combined voices With dulcet air of love that heaven doth ring, And pay again their unconfused noises With interest ever. List, I hear them sing!
I sat only two tables off from the one I was sacked at,  Just three years ago, And here was another meringue like the one which I hacked at  When pride was brought low And the coffee arrived the place which she had to use tact at  For striking the blow. &ldquo;I'm making some changes next week in the organisation  And though I admire Your work for me, John, yet the need to increase circulation  Means you must retire: An outlook more global than yours is the qualification  I really require.&rdquo; Oh sickness of sudden betrayal! Oh purblind Creator!  Oh friendship denied! I stood on the pavement and wondered which loss was the greater   The cash or the pride. Explanations to make to subordinates, bills to pay later  Churned up my inside. I fell on my feet. But what of those others, worse treated,  Your memory's ghosts, In gloomy bed-sitters in Fulham, ill-fed and unheated,  Applying for posts? Do they haunt their successors and you as you sit here repleted  With entr&eacute;es and roasts?
When ardent summer skies are bright  With myriad friendly lamps that glow Down from their dark, mysterious height  To charm the shrouded earth below   Lost in a faith we do not know, Nor human discord ever jars  With eyes that wide and wider grow, He sits and waits for shooting stars. And when they slide across the night  Like arrows from a Titan's bow, He shudders for supreme delight  And shouts to see them scamper so,  No sneering science comes to show The poor brain crossed with silly scars;  But flushed with joys that overflow, He sits and waits for shooting stars. We call him an unlovely wight;  But if his wit be something slow, Nor ever weary of the sight  That Adam saw so long ago   Released from knowledge and its woe, No gloom his constant rapture mars:   Oblivious from head to toe, He sits and waits for shooting stars.
If a bush were to speak with a tongue of fire To me, it would be a briar; The barberry, bearing unreachable droplets of blood, Or, bristling in winter, rugosas with their red hoard Of rosehips and a caucus of birds singing. Come Spring, in a burst at the road's turn, A snowblossom bank of the prickly hawthorn; Or drooping in June on their spiny, forbidding stem Blackberries ripe with the freight of dark juice in them. If I should listen to a bush in flame Announce the Unpronounceable Name And demand requital by a doom On my seed, compelling more Than I'd answer for, what no one else would ask, That voice of fire would blaze in a briar I cannot grasp.
History melts my houses, But they were all one house Where in the dark beginning A tall and maniac nurse Hid tortures behind the door And afterwards kissed me Promising all as before. The second house was music; The childish hands of fear Lying on a piano That was blackness and light, Opened my life with sound  Extorting promises Loud in the ringing air. After that, broken houses, The wealthy halls of cloud Haunted by living parents And the possessive face. Power and outrage looking At the great river Marvellous filthy and gold. When love lay in my arms I all night kissed that mouth, And the incredible body Slept warm at my side; But the walls fell apart Among my lifetime dream  O, a voice said crying, My mother's broken heart. Nothing was true in the sense I wanted it to be true. Victory came late, Excitement returned too soon. If my love were for the dead, Desire would restore Me to my life again. My love is for the living; They point me down to death, And death I will not take. My promises have grown, My kiss was never false, The faint clear-colored walls Are not forever down.
We don't speak the same language but by some miracle understand each other. I hold up a pencil and say pencil and you say yes, yes, pencil and make signs of writing in the air and the air becomes intelligible. We don't need a translator to confuse us. I look out at the sunset and say O and you nod, yes, yes, yes and maybe see the same vermilion mingled with silver mingled with lemon, cobalt with fire, earth with water. You say perhaps we're speaking some third language in a dream and it's all illusion. We should pinch each other to see if it's true. We pinch. It hurts. We are nevertheless unconvinced. We gossip. We abandon talk of the truth. This becomes habit. We don't listen anymore. We don't need to. I pinch you now and then and can't remember why and you cry out and we make up and there are children around us like waves tripping our feet. Do you understand? I point to the sunset but you study the saucepan. Yes, you say, I understand. The stringbeans are about ready. Put out the wine. I put out the wine. It doesn't matter if it's not real. Language is just music to live by anyway.
I sat in a too-big plastic hat on a metal corner by the shears, watching the tin flash by like a bright, liquid stream that could decapitate or disembowel. The mills are a gray city that erupted and rose from Earth like varicose veins, pores puffing smoke into the thickened sky, invading the world with its own metal. Learning to believe the mutilation, one man smacked and deprived of genitals, another whistling as they sawed off his foot, I accepted another kind of faith in work, that of gin and eyes like cracked crystal. I took a prodigal walk from the university and manners, following the horizon of my father, treading on the prophecies and songs  &ldquo;Lord, child, don't trouble the waters&rdquo;
Who has passed here? whither were these feet bent? Not floundering as in mud, nor wild with flight, Their track has kinship with the path of light; Choice led, they never yielded forced consent, One urge fed on and fostered their intent So that success encountered them by right, Hindrance was balked, weakness transformed to might, And buoyant kindness eased the toil they spent. Steadied from grappled danger, daunted fear, They bore the freed dream of a yearning heart Whose truant fancies trooped in sage control Were focussed on the implicit counterpart Of this out-facing world ... Hush! still we hear, Like zephyr April woodland tunes, a soul.
A wedge in the nature of the world or clock whose numbers change frequenter than hands. It may be milk. What I remembered of you was cloth I think, my blurred sight helping itself out by hands. I feel you coming across countryside. Be. Be and make me glad. The old words come again sure as the fountains of remorse that is the core of poetry  that no one has ever loved enough or left enough, and here we go singing of it, that sacred absence which is what I mostly know of God. To love and to be sure, in that hollow place inside the solid world just one word down. Whose tears are prime salt, our looks our mercury. Sulfur dreams. We are apart by alchemy, clock milk, terrible peace. I wake to you again and it is always your birthday.
Once, trunks pitched into or dragged down rivers, stones cracked off or molded smooth by exposure to edges, and living trees, too, and all things were spiritual, they flowed with us in and out of seasons, dispositions, everything not without motion, and nothing was, lived in our bones and went on with our marrow at narrows' ends: but then the ruler, the calculator found and added up numbers, groceries came to so much a week, and sums and subtractions slowed negotiations into form: with access to little, we put ourselves in charge of it: but, now, our adding machines, as subtle almost as the world, take in quantities unimaginably specific and broad, and now again we see not established identities and limits but the free flow returned, the spiritual comings and goings so dense, interpenetrant, and responsive that tone and feeling are our guide, and rivers, tides, fronts, highs flow as they flowed before, and we see with a trillion events per second, hear and taste in a flood, and live, if we live, liveliest in this broad neighborliness.
<>  O well-beloved, beneath the falling night; Be hushed, O winds, through glade and grove and tree, Weave silence into sweetest melody   While I watch with delight. Sleep, sweetly sleep; and let thy softest breath  All trustfully steal forth unto the stars, And give mine ear assurance glad that saith,  No evil end that is akin to Death   This peaceful vision mars. No, thou shalt wake; and though I know full well  The years shall dart between in weary dance, Yet more I know what none can clearly tell  That though the strident bolts and bars of Hell   Work utmost severance, I still to thee from age to age shall grow,  Thy name with new delight for ever twined, Till in the distant rift that none yet know Thy life athwart my life may inly flow,   And we be one in mind. So Hope, that still is king when all else dies,  And Love, from whose large glory Hope is born, Fix fast the happy star within my eyes That shall not fade away until there rise   An universal morn. Then sweetly sleep! Earth, hold thy treasure fast;  Sing, planets, marshalled round in glorious state; A whisper steals to me across the vast To which I gladly bow my head at last:   I am content to wait.
I step out of the car and stare at the flat houses with their bristly bushes wild and short like my old hair. I want to cut my hair and spread it over this snowy yard like my own ashes, I want to curl inside a sidewalk square my ear to the ground, cupped, listening what could I bring back to life? Would I hear the rough chalk scrawl over cement? This house the priest blessed over thirty years ago when the lawn was mud and boards.  I think, standing in the street. The wind blows cold but I know this wind, its harsh front. <> and my hands are trembling, I am sighing. The car door slams. I clap my hands for the hell of it, a clap on a street corner echoing a little, among friends. Once I stood here for hours trying to hit the streetlight with a snowball, to leave a white smudge. I have left no smudge, nothing I could call mine. The grey sky presses down on these small houses, on my parents' house and its square slab. They are inside, maybe changing the channel on the TV, maybe grabbing a beer and a bowl of chips, maybe flushing the toilet, maybe scrubbing their faces, maybe peering out a dark window. I am waiting to step inside for the hug and the kiss, I am waiting to push away this grey sadness cement and sky. I grab a handful of snow and touch it to my forehead where it melts down my face. I smudge my chest with an X of snow, I toss handfuls on the yard, on the scraped sidewalk ashes, ashes, glowing in the streetlight before the melting, the disappearing. <> I listen for a moment. I lift my bags from the trunk. The porch light glows its yellow basket of tender light. I stomp my boots, and I go in.
Turn, let your nakedness reassume The sun's body, let weight stitch your arm With sleep: through you and under you, time. Sand whelming dune grass, gritty flurry Burying the small shoots to the knee  Panic seeps from your body slowly. And gull pivots seaward, steadying Then yielding. Blade and wing hang planing The one idea of wind too long For the eye narrowing, tiring these Are receptacles, surprise gathers Into them tense against vacancies, Waiting till you wake. For then the low Sound alters, light is newly hollow, And the eye's quick lift its own shadow  And the wing over you no reining Hawk or falcon's, but greater, cupping You in its air, freezing you how long At the center, fresh crumb of darkness Licked at by light: see the hunger-trace, Fanning through feathers in a faint slice, Slit of glitter left by lean feedings  Waiting to strain, break clean and crippling In the stroke downward of that still wing.
With what reluctance, What misgiving, Torn from the substance Of timeless living, Parted from night, At last you fall From the secret waters' Circling ball. After long waiting Starfish-wise, Transfixed, creating To praise the skies No mystery more To marvel at Than her laboured-for Magnificat; Plucked from the womb But strange to breath, You enter this room So near to death. And who shall unravel From spire and shell The coil of marvel From which you fell? Wonder unmet: Beneath that sea, Unsundered yet, Though dropped, not free From the swaying cord By which you fed, Green infant lord Of the dark sea bed, Your instincts probe For what is not there, A watery globe That has not known air; Then at once life races To fill your veins; Night's shell unfastens: The pearl remains. I saw blood travel Along your veins, And breath unravel From ancient skeins Life, as the shivered Hour-glass ran, That cry delivered Which made you man.
On the beach at Forte dei Marmi yesterday afternoon the Contessa and I found ourselves with nothing to do except make love. I discover that the presence of a few grains of Italian sand adds a titillating piquancy to the act of heterosexual love. Until at last the Contessa turned over, and, leaning on an elbow as elegant as a Greek amphora looked up at me and shook her silver hair. &lsquo;Strawberries, yes,&rsquo; she said. &lsquo;Cream, yes. But grains of sand, definitely no. It feels like the death of a Thousand Cuts. Let us return to a double bed.&rsquo; &lsquo;Contessa,&rsquo; I remarked, and taking her hand drew her down on the Tyrrhenian sand beside me, &lsquo;you will, I hope, remember that beautiful sentence uttered by the Archbishop of Toledo as he pursued up a pillar in the cathedral a Firbank catamite he loved: &ldquo;Only the oleanders can ever come between us.&rdquo;&rsquo;
the lark tilts up the sky nobodya brief enough song | from Amp&ubar; (late 18th century | so much snow nowhere to grasp it going with all eyes | Anonymous (late 18th century | summerdark cloud the moon runs over | Rank&obar; (1726&ndash;99 | everyone around in and out of bloom everywhere | Chora (1729&ndash;81 | Ah well, Spring passes anew whenever it comes each year | Gekky&obar; (?&ndash;1824 |
<>   And down the street  The folk come out to welcome me   On eager feet. O neighbours, God be with you all, But for my true love I must call; She lingers in her father's hall   So shy, so sweet!  Here is a string of milky pearls   For her to wear,  An amber comb to match the curls   Of her bright hair. O neighbours, do not crowd me so! Stand by! stand by! for I must go To put on my love's hand of snow   This gold ring fair.  Good dame, why do you block the way   And shake your head?  Must all the things you have to say   Just now be said? O neighbours, let me pass but why  My God, what makes you women cry? Come tell me that I too may die!   Is my love dead?  &ldquo;Nay, Marjorie's a living thing,   And fair and strong.  Yet did you wait to give your ring   A year too long. To seek her love there came the Moon; Now Marjorie at night and noon Is chained and sits alone to croon   The Moon's love-song.&rdquo;
I saw the country of the sleepless, glancing eye Where things resemble life. Even the distant people Who walk in thin electric mountaintop blue air Are lifelike here, and over there Is a valley where slow sheep gaze At a man's body fallen in grass, and are things seen As if for the first time and the last, And are now, as if forever, bright and clear: The shining husband, straw flower in his lapel, Enfolds his love's flat breast and quickening side, And beyond the suburb, a white casino rises, Gleams like a wedding cake and disappears, And through the park at evening faces are Wheeling behind plate glass in limousines; It is a vision of life within motion, Volition within life That has no beginning and no end And is always near. Beneath the floodlit tower clock A lost child with a sailboat under his arm Stares at the time. And at his side an old man on a bench Faces the river where the factories are Until light fails and a far window opens like a pale wishing star Blank bedroom walls where two naked lovers quarrel. In a wakeful hour I almost hear Noise of lost cattle in a trampled field, The husband's voice, the laughter of the bride, Gear-shift of motors through the park, Boy's cry and factory whistle, The scream, the thrust of a body against the wall  And if one saw them as one might see them in a mirror Move, dissolve in night and reappear, That would be life itself and always there. I have heard that the ancients saw them in a circle From light to darkness, darkness to light again, Seen through the branches of a golden tree. They stand between me and the unseeing, unlearned, unknowl- edgeable world. I wear them as a man might wear a shield.
And the traveller stumbles in darkness, hearing beasts in the forest, fearing the pitfalls, pitch-black ditches, the brambles. Dread in his heart: and the air whispering death: and his breath strangled. But along the path: a torch! The soaked pine blazes, blinding the night. The grateful seizing, and he feels the fear half-gone, and sees the pathway clear. And then at last the sun's slow rise from night: cold fragile light that streaks across the timber. And the way uncertain still. All night he'd known that they were there: knew they were waiting there: waiting for him. But then at dawn, emerging from the forest, he felt his heart at peace. The day! Alive with brightness! Wonderful to be alive! Then he thought of the other forests beyond ...
My thoughts through yours refracted into speech transmute this room musically tonight, the notes of contact flowing, rhythmic, bright with an informal art beyond my single reach. Outside, dark birds fly in a greening time: wings of our sistered wishes beat these walls: and words afflict our minds in near footfalls approaching with a latening hour's chime. And if an essential thing has flown between us, rare intellectual bird of communication, let us seize it quickly:let our preference choose it instead of softer things to screen us each from the other's self:muteness or hesitation, nor petrify live miracle by our indifference.
This is what lit the hunters of smoke and the paths of the forest. The tracking and the advantage of the steaming quarry, This is what the pillars of fluted thought, the image vibrating through all the dances to the unknown where the leap is, This is what the event and the battle-rags, the women secret in their suffering, the long rages of the pioneers, the glory standing over a final valley, This is what they led to in their charts of vision:the sweat of bargaining and the smoky gold eagles, The indirect lighting and the gamblers' despair. Shifting landscapes of a Convention Hall. This is a bazaar where there are nothing but drugstores Each one has a single drug tested only on mandrills. This is a dry arroyo expecting the avalanche, Thirty-seven men offering foolproof ways of survival. They trade their partisans.That is their method of choice. When they say survival, they do not mean living under the avalanche. They do not recognize the existence of the avalanche. They mean how to set up shop in the arroyo, And show a profit after the first six months.
Slobber pave feet. Blow sun nig los agin pick down foot cop again, arm bandit faster nigger close to dead, and mama close to dead, italian money makin machine nigger &amp; his dopey queen sit on a stoop wait for biscuit to blow um down. dope in a arm. The sun. dope in a leg. The warm water from heaven. dope in a brain. The collection of beauty reprises itself. dope in the ground dope in the sound of the beating of the earth's heart. flow dope swifter than words or deeps flow italian money from street to street in the arms and hearts of my people who love you italians who like you to have rugs in yr cellars and rugs in your bathroom while they have no covering even on their assholes flow italian dope in the white hatted little pimplefaced fag who brings it flow italian dope in the arm and lipstick of the pope who brings it too may you all O.D. together like my people, my brothers down the street, who like to O.D. they do it all the time why is dope so nice to us why do we like it why is highness so nice why do we allways be it dope is shit shit eater put shit in yr arm in yr mama's tears when they drag you out a hallway, and sheldon boloney giggles about it what difference do it make, stay high, sucker chump, layout and be cool the devil is corny, we know that, aint that the secret, brother, the cool ness, the whole of elijah digested under your sky, kneeling in a hallway slowmotion fastmotion blood congealed on the dropper fire swoopin up your throat, last minute regrets, shit took you off, sheldon boloney gigglin
God takes care of it for everyone, once. And armies figure it out, wholesale, for others, in the air, on the ground, at sea. Living, though, is a habit hard to shake, and they don't move the heavy stuff at you till later when you are about ready, usually, any time. Still, maybe I'd help, knowing what I do about need and the grim alternatives; maybe I'd be very kind when the hurt eyes turn, suddenly loud, toward me.
You smell like castile soap, thin alkaline scent of babies' hair, and the reek of black tobacco. You're short for a man. Eye to my eye level. You point to your forehead, a crescent scar like mine. The less we talk the more we understand, the way my brother at the age of three spoke only the language of twins, with the eyes, murmuring. My mother used me to translate, obedient girl, yanking me outside where he clutched a tree trunk, awkward, his plump cheek to the bark. I said: Mama, he doesn't  We got hit. Broadside. I woke up sharp and alone in the dark, one cut here, over my eye. Absurd. At three years old, my brother was dead. <> the breath sticks like a bone in the throat. And you when you stand on this raining street and imagine the sea in Bahia, the North American wind is filling your eyes. I recognize your eyes. Maybe because you are exiled you can talk without talk. Like him. Like a twin.
The garden had not much to say Except that that was where stuff grew By paths which ground themselves away. Obedient to the names you knew, It could not help those names to fit, Although it made the best of it, And putting on the usual show, Brought all its flowers out of bed In tetherings of to and fro; In sun that brought things to a head. Some other garden held your eyes; This could not take you by surprise, But studied your indifference In blurs of white, or brown and green, Beyond the dark, unyielding fence That you had set so high between The spaces you were moving to; The garden only passing through.
A book opens. People come out, bend this way and talk, ponder, love, wander around while pages turn. Where did the plot go? Why did someone sing just as the train went by? Here come chapters with landscape all over whatever happens when people meet. Now a quiet part: a hospital glows in the dark. I don't think that woman with the sad gray eyes will ever come back. And what does it mean when the Italian has so many ideas? Maybe a war is coming. The book is ending. Everyone has a little tremolo in them; all are going to die and it's cold and the snow, and the clear air. They took someone away. It's ending, the book is ending. But I thought never mind. It closes.
Start with the nothing-could-be-simpler Line where skies depend on seas, Endless talks on talks, palabra Of reflections and replies To what winds howl and rainstorms jabber. Then move in toward the bay, forever Just about to close its grasp Around a lake, the green drugged river Seeping out like mountain soup Into the largesse of saltwater. It's all around you now, its growth, Its thru-ways, hoardings, open shops, Its people crowding every width Of pavement, cranes above the rooftops, Mayoral, watching life beneath. And then the suburbs. You're there somewhere On some road, ridiculously named, Living at a certain number, Waking up from rooms you dreamt To where you gradually remember.
March has come to the bridge head, Peach boughs and apricot boughs hang over a thousand gates, At morning there are flowers to cut the heart, And evening drives them on the eastward-flowing waters. Petals are on the gone waters and on the going, And on the back-swirling eddies, But to-day's men are not the men of the old days, Though they hang in the same way over the bridge-rail. The sea's colour moves at the dawn And the princes still stand in rows, about the throne, And the moon falls over the portals of Sei-go-yo, And clings to the walls and the gate-top. With head gear glittering against the cloud and sun, The lords go forth from the court, and into far borders. They ride upon dragon-like horses, Upon horses with head-trappings of yellow metal, And the streets make way for their passage. Haughty their passing, Haughty their steps as they go in to great banquets, To high halls and curious food, To the perfumed air and girls dancing, To clear flutes and clear singing; To the dance of the seventy couples; To the mad chase through the gardens. Night and day are given over to pleasure And they think it will last a thousand autumns, Unwearying autumns. For them the yellow dogs howl portents in vain, And what are they compared to the lady Riokushu, That was cause of hate! Who among them is a man like Han-rei Who departed alone with his mistress, With her hair unbound, anti he his own skiffsman!
Why seraphim like lutanists arranged Above the trees? And why the poet as Eternal  Air is air, Its vacancy glitters round us everywhere. Its sounds are not angelic syllables But our unfashioned spirits realized More sharply in more furious selves. And light That fosters seraphim and is to them Coiffeur of haloes, fecund jeweller  Was the sun concoct for angels or for men? Sad men made angels of the sun, and of The moon they made their own attendant ghosts, Which led them back to angels, after death. Let this be clear that we are men of sun And men of day and never of pointed night, Men that repeat antiquest sounds of air In an accord of repetitions. Yet, If we repeat, it is because the wind Encircling us, speaks always with our speech. Light, too, encrusts us making visible The motions of the mind and giving form To moodiest nothings, as, desire for day Accomplished in the immensely flashing East, Desire for rest, in that descending sea Of dark, which in its very darkening Is rest and silence spreading into sleep. ... Evening, when the measure skips a beat And then another, one by one, and all To a seething minor swiftly modulate. Bare night is best. Bare earth is best. Bare, bare, Except for our own houses, huddled low Beneath the arches and their spangled air, Beneath the rhapsodies of fire and fire, Where the voice that is in us makes a true response, Where the voice that is great within us rises up, As we stand gazing at the rounded moon.
All this time you were dead and I did not know I was learning to speak and speaking to you and you were not there I was seeing you tall, walking the corridor of that tall shining building I was learning to walk and walking to you and it was not true you were still living still lying still it was not true that you were giving me a rose telling me stories pouring a wine-story, there were bubbles in it all this time I was remembering untrue speaking untrue, seeing a lie. It is true.
The lightning's slanting eyes pierce through the day. The pines and palms are petrified. Small torrents rush Between their stony leaves. The rice plants sway And trample in their narrow lake. A thousand fish-mouths break the slush. The  Those eager wrists, their hands are cups for this green raging rain.  Vast stronghold of what the western books call Nature, and the last. The spring weeds hide the bombing, weeds have hidden &Obar;mi's old imperial city  This Rice-abounding Land, where crowded hands to crowding mouths are passed, The close closed cycle turns. And in the West The undecided voices of the grace-abounding lands, in whom we rest Some hopes. In strange accord the sure cicadas sing. Our bowels grow this rice but where does that grace spring?
second stanza.&rsquo; That's what he said, leaning over me in the classroom, puffing on his tweed pipe, the air thick with twist and reek. &lsquo;Always start your poems with the second stanza, my boy, and you won't go far wrong.&rsquo; I pondered this in my rooms in the University. I knew, just knew, it was the Thirties. &lsquo;The Thirties are a sort of second stanza, aren't they?&rsquo; I said to him. The air was thick with twist and reek. &lsquo;I mean if you take the War poets as a sort of first stanza, maybe count the Twenties as the bit of white space you find between stanzas ... &rsquo; I was developing a point, nicely. He looked at me with eyes like carpet tiles. &lsquo;If Christ had only had a second stanza,&rsquo; he said, the air thick, &lsquo;he would only have risen again, not died at all.&rsquo; It was a famous point. I remembered it all through the war, the period of Austerity, until the sixties, when my son came home smoking Pot. I tried to explain about the second stanza but he said &lsquo;These are the Sixties, daddy-o. These are today and now. These days we leave out the
The one to one walking talk of the dog the line of the dog, tail, hair of the dog  trying, in reality, to walk: a  see the dog walk a memory of some poor son of a bitch dog <> all the way, you'll get there, poor, poor dog.
You've painted a thin man with his hands raised high so high is he walking slowly or is he just standing nowhere to go? Oh he's a weird ghost but he's not a ghost. He's androgynous but he's not. He's a secret hermaphrodite. He's sexless but erotic in all the non-erogenous zones. This man is brown, tanned from the sun yellow glares behind him  and his heart can be seen through his chest: bright red fresh blood a heart-shaped lump like a head of garlic balanced on its tip. This man looks strong for all his leanness. And he holds up a huge red rose in his right hand and an enormous head of garlic in his left hand. Is the rose for Mary? For every woman named Mary? Can garlic only be held in the left hand? What does he mean by this? Garlic streaked creamy yellow and purple in his left hand  and a happy red rose fluttering in his right hand  Why are his hands raised so high? Why have you painted a man  and not a woman?
Accord, the harmonic presence, open to discord, where we find our shoes turn the handle &amp; go out. O lift the latch, ibis-hearted voyager! (the clash is the tomb door opening outward, they have put us living in the tomb!) A big bird on its toes: first thing we see. Why did we come out to see that snapping at alligators? Chewing the zodiac for breakfast, you got stars going for you, baby. It is not vulgar. It is voyage in the name of Love, in the love of Law, in the law of Name. Prepare your lotus wand, bend the expert lips upon your reed. Do you smell a Goat? Dont turn back to answer theres no one here.
They took him into confidence each oak  Of the far forest: and all day he sat  Hearing of Nature from an autocrat, An oak so old, Dodona might have spoke Its infant oracles through it; that, part  Of the oracular beauty of the gods, Yet irresponsible, down in its heart  Still felt the rapture of their periods. They took him into confidence the skies:  And all night long he lay beneath one star,  Hearing of God. . . . One that was chorister At Earth's first morning; that beheld fierce eyes Of rebel angels, and the birth of Hell;  Whom God set over Eden and o'er them, The Two, as destiny; that did foretell  How Christ lay born at far-off Bethlehem.
PAUL:What do you write? Write me a song. What about?The fish I do not know.  The man had little streams. And a bright pain. It was bright when he pushed With a noise and a bar. A tooth.With a hole. There can be holes in the ground, Can there be holes In the white sky? The sky is a tree.It spreads. Does it hurt the ground to have holes? Why, the sky was
 Father of Love! We leave our souls with Thee! Oh! may Thy Holy Spirit to us be  A peaceful Dove!  Now when day's strife And bitterness are o'er, Oh! in our hearts all bruis&egrave;d gently pour  The dew of life.  So as the rose  Though fading on the stem  Awakes to blush when morning's lustrous gem  Upon it glows;   May we awake, Soothed by Thy priceless balm, To chant with grateful hearts our morning psalm,  And blessings take.  Or let it be, That where the palm trees rise, And crystal streams flow, we uplift our eyes  To Thee! to Thee!
&ldquo;It's love,&rdquo; they say. You touch the right one and a whole half of the universe wakes up, a new half. Some people never find that half, or they neglect it or trade it for money or success and it dies. The faces of big dogs tell, over the years, that size is a burden: you enjoy it for awhile but then maintenance gets to you. When I get old I think I'll keep, not a little dog, but a serious dog, for the casual, drop-in criminal  My kind of dog, unimpressed by dress or manner, just knowing what's really there by the smell. Your good dogs, some things that they hear they don't really want you to know  it's too grim or ethereal. And sometimes when they look in the fire they see time going on and someone alone, but they don't say anything.
These are liberals in starched dungarees the color of sharkskin; this is a college senior who hunts seals in the Yukon with a hammer; this is our president, his testes in magnified glass, the color of crystal. Our language is clear, polished, of cast wax, the breathing measured, each in his box seat, honed and ready; academic freedom, black studies; pup tents on our lawn's meridian, camped and potted in our orchidean garden, freshened with incest-manure, humanities, clean funds from directors and the government. The conservatives, the lower division, always against war, negotiate our flints, feathered gowns, tenure, genteel wines, and this song.
Motionless under the moon-beam, Up to his feathers in the stream; Although fish leap, the white heron Shivers in a dumbfounded dream. God has not died for the white heron. Although half famished he'll not dare Dip or do anything but stare Upon the glittering image of a heron, That now is lost and now is there. God has not died for the white heron. But that the full is shortly gone And after that is crescent moon, It's certain that the moon-crazed heron Would be but fishes' diet soon. God has not died for the white heron.
The sky folds and enters your tongue, The clouds become your teeth, Your speech is rain Going up to the moon Her dark eyes come back with you, You both see another face The moon becomes embarrassed Brings its people of shadows Closer to the solar plexus Together with the golden Disk Running off toward a cave, In the darkest Eyelands Now closed The river becomes a light That just stares at you With its sound.
I've an appetite for curls and dimples in a chin. Awhiz through the midnight stratospherey on my lickety spittle I zeppelin, pursuing little girls who are good as gold to cook them up for supper in my eerie. I marinate and lard them, I roast their thin-skin hides, I bake a custard pudding of their saccharine insides, and since they have no spines at all I pickle their backsides. I love a dainty blush and neatly washed ears. Mother's darling helpers, Daddy's perfect dears, nice proper prissies who do what they're told are just my dish.
An old ewe that somehow till this year had given the ram the slip. We thought her barren. Good Friday, and the Irish peace deal close, and tonight she's serious, restless and hoofing the straw. We put off the quiet supper and bottle of wine we'd planned, to celebrate if the news is good. Her waters broke an hour ago and she's sipped her own lost salty ocean from the ground. While they slog it out in Belfast, eight decades since Easter 1916, exhausted, tamed by pain, she licks my fingers with a burning tongue, lies down again. Two hooves and a muzzle. But the lamb won't come. You phone for help and step into the lane to watch for car lights. This is when the whitecoats come to the women, well-meaning, knowing best, with their needles and forceps. So I ease my fingers in, take the slippery head in my right hand, two hooves in my left. We strain together, harder than we dared. I feel a creak in the limbs and pull till he comes in a syrupy flood. She drinks him, famished, and you find us peaceful, at a cradling that might have been a death. Then the second lamb slips through her opened door, the stone rolled away.
He sits between the doctor and the law. Neither can help. Barbiturate in paw one, whiskey in paw two, a dying man: the poet down, and his fell caravan. They laugh and they mistake the lash that lurks in his tongue for the honey of his works. The poet is at bay, the hounds baying, dig his grave with careful kindness, saying: &lsquo;Another whiskey, and make it a large one!&rsquo; Priests within, acolytes at the margin the red impaled bull's roar must fascinate  they love the dead, the living man they hate. They were designing monuments in case  and making furtive sketches of his face, and he could hear, above their straining laughs, the rustling foolscap of their epitaphs.
<>  Of pallid clay; The shadowy wood around is sad and sere;  The sky is gray: The mossy waters wearily creep Dim through a land that seems asleep, Or lost in old remembering deep  Of some forgotten day. The ovals of the acorns, split with rain,  That sprout and spread, Splash mud and moss with many a sinister stain,  Faint streaks of red: No sound upon the hush intrudes Except the drip of wet, that broods Like some old crime upon the woods,  And holds them grim with dread.
Do they block the way? Do they obstruct? Tripping about with their ladylike hams And their groomed and mushroom-like faces? Do they stop their flow? Do they prevent the touch? Like india-rubber and asbestos Do they prevent the current? Is that all they exist for? Mushroom-faced, heavy-bottomed And oh so &ldquo;upper&rdquo;! Are they just the deadening fungus On the decaying effort of mankind? So plausible, oh so plausible! We wouldn't hurt you for the world, says the parasite, The smooth-faced, fat-hammed, fungussy fat one To its victim. Ugh! down with them! Down with them, down with them! Kick them over, the toadstools, Smash them up, the smooth-faced, fat-faced plausibles. But softly, softly. And swiftly, swiftly, With no shouting And no talking whatsoever. But softly, softly and ruthlessly Down with them!
My bird had a grin like a water-melon, My bird was a hopeless case. She wanted to look like Elvis Presley So she paid a man to wipe the smile off her face, He was My friend the plastic surgeon Your friend the plastic surgeon Your friendly neighbourhood plastic surgeon (Enriched with nourishing marrowbone jelly). My mate was a dirty little Fascist, They shouted him down when he cursed the Jews, And nobody recognised his patriotic motives Till he hired a man to explain his views, He got My friend the public relations man Your friend the PRO Your friendly neighbourhood public relations man (Enriched with nourishing marrowbone jelly). My dad was a nervy sort of navvy He insured his job and his life and me Fire, flood, suicide and acts of God, And then he insured his insurance policy, He paid My friend the man from the Prudential Your friend the man from the Pru Your friendly neighbourhood man from the Prudential (Enriched with nourishing marrowbone jelly). My mum spent her life watching telly Till the Epilogue told her that her soul would burn. Now she's got peace of mind and she still does nothing For she pays one-tenth of all we earn To My friend the Anglican clergyman Your friend the clergyman Your friendly neighbourhood Anglican clergyman (Enriched with nourishing marrowbone jelly). The plastic surgeon and the public relations man, The man from the Prudential and the man from God  Pals, pals, every one a pal. P-A-L, Prolongs Active Life (Enriched with nourishing marrowbone jelly).
<> actor and actress author and conjoint authoress manager, promptress property man and make-up woman. Itis an amateur performance but the piece is well written but the lines imply the business but the piece means little but the last two words read: <> The actors are their own audience. As actors, they are artists As audience, they are critics. They have read the play beforehand in order to do it justice, and they know the final stage directions are impossible. The piece comes to an end. The lovers face one another. Neither moves a muscle. There is no applause.
<>  Of our State: May the glory of her fame  Be as great! In the battle's dread eclipse, When she opens iron lips, When our ships confront the ships  Of the foe, May each word of steel she utters carry woe!  Here's to her! Here's to her, who, like a knight  Mailed of old, From far sea to sea the Right  Shall uphold. May she always deal defeat,  When contending navies meet, And the battle's screaming sleet  Blinds and stuns,  With the red, terrific thunder of her guns.  Here's to her! Here's to her who bears the name  Of our State; May the glory of her fame  Be as great! Like a beacon, like a star, May she lead our squadrons far,  When the hurricane of war  Shakes the world,  With her pennant in the vanward broad unfurled.  Here's to her!
We are warned by slow footsteps Resounding above the daily towers Of the forest. These branches arch over clearings Where lizards reduce their prodigious love. Snouts of the white bat furrow Through dark battlements, pursuing What has not dared life. There are dwellings But our position is empty to meet Even the commonest of this second people. Almost mournful light seizes Upon the creeping aisles, surprising Leopards and herds of tangled snakes. The waters of the river are covered With hair that the wind blows Into monotonous curls. Nothing has changed on the landroads But we do not promise to return. We do not expect this love to perish. Among us there is a man accused Of devotion. His wound seems to ask no revelation But enables the panther to sleep. What it is to assist in absolutes, If only to match the hyena's love. Who will not allow us conduct That this second life decides? Look at the sickness! we are only foolish To prolong the unclean splendor of children Who have no bodies to take their crying to. These then connect with tubular suns That grow out of lakes Tranquil as black light, and their weight Lowers the earth by the size of journeys. Lament for the natives of these brighter worlds! I hold this terrible storm-lantern Above the empty waters. Why does no one return to greet me? What have I done that the wound rejoices? Among us there is a man accused Of defiance. His way seems to answer all running.
While the world wonders in its latest round And growing things come to a head and die, While the armies make the month suspect And the sea invites the sound of wrack, While roads are heavy with sad holiday And lost love treasons to the senseless lock And dressed up in flowers, peace reposes And while, for us, hope walking on the sea Seems a white figure lost under the mountain And the sound of our voices is far, far away And time prepares for us his tidal wave To sweep our harbour clear, and wash the shore And we surrender to the final pain While all the shades are dizzy in our eyes, What shall I say to you, my swan?
Fish (fly-replete, in depth of June, Dawdling away their wat'ry noon) Ponder deep wisdom, dark or clear, Each secret fishy hope or fear. Fish say, they have their Stream and Pond; But is there anything Beyond? This life cannot be All, they swear, For how unpleasant, if it were! One may not doubt that, somehow, Good Shall come of Water and of Mud; And, sure, the reverent eye must see A Purpose in Liquidity. We darkly know, by Faith we cry, The future is not Wholly Dry. Mud unto mud! Death eddies near  Not here the appointed End, not here! But somewhere, beyond Space and Time, Is wetter water, slimier slime! And there (they trust) there swimmeth One Who swam ere rivers were begun, Immense, of fishy form and mind, Squamous, omnipotent, and kind; And under that Almighty Fin, The littlest fish may enter in. Oh! never fly conceals a hook, Fish say, in the Eternal Brook, But more than mundane weeds are there, And mud, celestially fair; Fat caterpillars drift around, And Paradisal grubs are found; Unfading moths, immortal flies, And the worm that never dies. And in that Heaven of all their wish, There shall be no more land, say fish.
Had I known that you were going I would have given you messages for her, Now two years dead, Whom I shall always love. As it is, should she entreat you how it goes with me, You must reply: as well as with most, you fancy; That I love easily, and pass the time. And she will not know how all day long between My life and me her shadow intervenes, A young thin girl, Wearing a white skirt and a purple sweater And a narrow pale blue ribbon about her hair. I used to say to her, &ldquo;I love you Because your face is such a pretty colour, No other reason.&rdquo; But it was not true. Oh, had I only known that you were going, I could have given you messages for her!
Where's there the missing of it, the wheres hold of rolling the streets hold of smell in the hold of taste touch in the beyond what they be this five sense we has or spose to i cant say i'm alone with 4thousan colored folks on this street alone defying chafaggy's sin-suds and they's in the, hold of the, taste and they fly guitar laughs
<> snow; And over all the carmine sunset flush, Gave nature's face a woman's love-lit blush, As if her heart dreamed of the spring below; So high your house, dear friend, I seemed to grow Up to the evening star, where in the hush Of twilight, I did feel the pulses brush My soul, rising from the city that we know. At last I reached your door you welcomed me With your warm genial smile and close hand- shake, And gave me greetings to your company  Your friends, whom you made mine for friend- ship's sake. And there before your blazing logs did we Soon hear the voice of dreams upon us break.
Nine truckloads of jewels while the people starved Nine truckloads in the mud And the people's enemies  coming fast. Stick 'em in your pockets the General said, They're yours, by God, and check them in for the people at the Consulate in Perpignan. But some of them didn't bother like those who had stolen them first and were not arrested for it as these were in their need, not held for it as these were in their dire need.
The hush of death is on the night. The corn, That loves to whisper to the wind; the leaves, That dance with it, are silent: one perceives No motion mid the fields, as dry as horn. What light is that? It cannot be the morn!  Yet in the east it seems its witchcraft weaves A fiery rose. Look! how it grows! it heaves And flames and tosses! 'Tis a burning barn! And now the night is rent with shouts and shots. Dark forms and faces hurry past. The gloom Gallops with riders. Homes are less than straw Before this madness: human lives, mere lots Flung in and juggled from the cap of Doom, Where Crime stamps yelling on the face of Law.
<> Who buried him and brought these table loads Of erudition indeterminate, Dun-covered theses, Gothic-lettered codes: &ldquo;Zeit und Streitfragen der Biologie,&rdquo; &ldquo;The Mystery of Matter,&rdquo; black with mould, &ldquo;Annalen der Naturphilosophie&rdquo;  Thus were his patient temples pigeonholed. The swift eraser through this tumbled sheaf Has left his name a blur where arid rages Of controversial scientists a-joust Fettered his fancy to unsung belief: What wines of youth were split upon these pages, What half-winged visions stifled in this dust!
I got into a lot of fights when I was growing up  a couple a week until I was 22  then I got married to a girl I hardly knew  it seemed at the time like the right thing to do  but until then I was so afraid that you all thought I was afraid that it filled me with a rage so deep and blue nobody ever knew who I was going to throw through the nearest window me or you  a lot of broken glass in my past  a lot of broken past in my glass back then too some of it wasn't even true like when I'd tell some stranger all about you, and we hadn't even met in fact, we haven't yet even though last night I felt my tongue slip through your lips again until it found your tongue and the doors of the universe shut behind them leaving them all alone to do their tongue dance and my brainwaves got lost in all that sensuous darkness while somewhere outside it I could smell your hair and feel your solid softness filling my arms until we were so close I could see out the back of you and into the eyes of some buddies I grabbed your behind to impress, even though I already knew there wasn't anything more than kissing that we were gonna do because that's all I wanted to and it was enough, like back in the '50s when I tried so hard to be tough, even in my dreams where I was always the star of all the teams and won all the games for you now the games don't mean so much to me, but you still do only I always wake up wondering, who the fuck are you?
I follow you downhill to the edge My feet taking as naturally as yours To a sideways tread, finding footholds Easily in the turf, accustomed As we are to a sloping country. The cliffs buttress the bay's curve to the north And here drop sheer and sudden to the sea. The choughs plummet from sight then ride The updraught of the cliffs' mild yellow Light, fold, fall with closed wings from the sky. At the last moment as in unison they turn A ripcord of the wind is pulled in time. He gives her food and the saliva Of his red mouth, draws her black feathers, sweet As shining grass across his bill. Rare birds that pair for life. There they go Divebombing the marbled wave a yard Above the spray. Wings flick open A stoop away From the drawn teeth of the sea.
Small sun against the lower edge licking us She showed me her tongue coated with thorns A careful life of stars in a redwood box times labor's loss not mine based upon the loss itself, &lsquo;not mine&rsquo; ... formed such words imperfectly bodied as empty sleep weighed against dream bodies and parts of bodies distributed according to given laws across a field Who could help but love the equations night's music hung from each line the headless man looks at the quarter moon and the moon watches the man resting invisible beneath a tree <> from the center of a courtyard where we watch ourselves talk This poem is called Rebuilding the House
What did I see when first I went to Greece? Shades of the Sixth across the Peloponnese. Though clear the clean-cut Doric temple shone Still droned the voice of Mr Gidney on; &ldquo;That  Wholly as interrogative?&rdquo; Edward Lear, Show me the Greece of wrinkled olive boughs Above red earth; thin goats, instead of cows, Each with its bell; the shallow terraced soil; The stone-built wayside shrine; the yellow oil; The tiled and cross-shaped church, who knows how old Its ashlar walls of honey-coloured gold? Three centuries or ten? Of course, there'll be The long meander off to find the key. The domed interior swallows up the day. Here, where to light a candle is to pray, The candle flame shows up the almond eyes Of local saints who view with no surprise Their martyrdoms depicted upon walls On which the filtered daylight faintly falls. The flame shows up the cracked paint sea-green blue And red and gold, with grained wood showing through  Of much-kissed ikons, dating from, perhaps, The fourteenth century. There across the apse, Ikon- and oleograph-adorned, is seen The semblance of an English chancel screen. &ldquo;With  Surely the diocese has some committee Advising it on taste?&rdquo; It is not so. Thus vigorously does the old tree grow, By persecution pruned, watered with blood, Its living roots deep in pre-Christian mud, It needs no bureaucratical protection. It is its own perpetual resurrection. Or take the galleon metaphor it rides Serenely over controversial tides Triumphant to the Port of Heaven, its home, With one sail missing that's the Pope's in Rome. Vicar, I hope it will not be a shock To find this village has no &lsquo;eight o'clock&rsquo;. Those bells you heard at eight were being rung For matins of a sort but matins sung. Soon will another set of bells begin And all the villagers come crowding in. The painted boats rock empty by the quay Feet crunch on gravel, faintly beats the sea. From the domed church, as from the sky, look down The Pantocrator's searching eyes of brown, With one serene all-comprehending stare On farmer, fisherman and millionaire.
Firing burst his head excruciation blasted silly clay declining blind development exploding fragile like the afternoon wastethe steeple placement flesh too hot to last or thin no winner knows the vulnerable victory arriving dead between the baby hands unlikely kindred disappearing cries around the brighter ravage relegates an ear alone an ear afflicted solitary teach the hollow formulate crude necrophilia perhaps or worse the phony whining bones disintegrate to tender tiny now impossible and true and true impossible
The Baltic Sea froze in 1307. Birds flew north From the Mediterranean in early January. There were meteor storms throughout Europe. On the first day of Lent Two children took their own lives: Their bodies Were sewn into goats' skins And were dragged by the hangman's horse The three miles down to the sea. They were given a simple grave in the sand. The following Sunday, Meister Eckhart Shouted that a secret word Had been spoken to him. He preached That Mary Magdalene Sought a dead man in the tomb But, in her confusion, found Only two angels laughing ... This was a consequence of her purity And her all too human grief. The Baltic Sea Also froze in 1303  nothing happened that was worthy of poetry.
<>  And dimmed the glow of her benignant star, Her tired limbs shall rest within a wood,  In a green glade where oaks and beeches are, Where the shy fawns, the pretty fawns, the deer,  With mild brown eyes shall view her spirit's husk, The sleeping woman of her will appear,  The maiden Dian shining through the dusk. And, when the stars are white as twilight fails,  And the green leaves are hushed, and the winds swoon, The calm pure thrilling throats of nightingales  Shall hymn her sleeping beauty to the moon. All the woods hushed save for a dripping rose, All the woods dim save where a glow-worm glows. Brimming the quiet woods with holiness,  The lone brown birds will hymn her till the dawn, The delicate, shy, dappled deer will press  Soft pitying muzzles on her swathed lawn. The little pretty rabbits running by,  Will pause among the dewy grass to peep, Their thudding hearts affrighted to espy  The maiden Dian lying there asleep. Brown, lustrous, placid eyes of sylvan things  Will wonder at the quiet in her face, While from the thorny branch the singer brings  Beauty and peace to that immortal place. Until the grey dawn sets the woods astir The pure birds' thrilling psalm will mourn for her.
The more I love you and see you in your greatness, the more, dearest, I see you in true light. The more I lower you, the less I seem to know you, sometimes losing you, sometimes keeping you in sight. This spring day, with my mind enlightened, I see a vision I've never seen before: this world's vanished; there's nothing at all; before me only a vast ocean unfolds. There's neither day nor night, no minutes or hours; the cataclysmic waters are controlled; in the midst of it all, with all your petals unfurled, you hover, sole lotus, and stay afloat. The king of the cosmos sits for ever, impassioned, and beholds in you his own self's reflection.
On the hedges grew the low melon moons. Before the crescent dark could sink her teeth  our bitch had all her mangy suitors   sparring for a wreath   of the midnight noons  in her womb. And they were no neuters. She spawned in a hurry a score of pups, all bald, blind, and growing old at her paps;     some of them alive enough to die in the cold of her love. Peacocks may have eyes in their tails, and crests. But She had in a row four pairs of breasts, where blind mouths plucked and swilled their fill till mouths had eyes, and She was full of flies.
Mother, shed no mournful tears, But gird me on my sword; And give no utterance to thy fears, But bless me with thy word. The lines are drawn!The fight is on! A cause is to be won! Mother, look not so white and wan; Give Godspeed to thy son. Now let thine eyes my way pursue Where'er my footsteps fare; And when they lead beyond thy view, Send after me a prayer. But pray not to defend from harm, Nor danger to dispel; Pray, rather, that with steadfast arm I fight the battle well. Pray, mother of mine, that I always keep My heart and purpose strong, My sword unsullied and ready to leap Unsheathed against the wrong.
If animals could talk would it depress us To bear with noble horses' boring headaches, Endure mendacities from nosey starlings, And learn how frivolously the horned cow ponders The cud that won't stay down, while the chameleon Beneath an opportunistic skin Holds unimpeachable faith with the one tenet, That it is good to eat, and, with one eye Half-creased asleep, sops up the heat of the sun? If we could understand the animals would it inspire us To be assured that kittens don't aspire to be Lionesses? That bees who build domed cities Are stupid and incapable of dreams? That the groundhog doesn't give a damn for shadows, And &AElig;sop was a great prevaricator Who made the creatures caper to the laws The Greeks derived from Reason since observance Danced less convincingly on toes than claws?
I don't know how many times I have sinned, or how many times I've wanted to burn my neighbor's ass in nitric acid. Jesus, yesterday I squeezed my son's mouth until it was a kiss of forced passion. He was just making noise upstairs with his army of rubber angels, jumping from block to block, a heaven's descent. Last night, I dreamed of making love to some man. I couldn't remember his face, but afterwards, we stood in fire, and I screamed at him that the Lord punishes by hot dreams. I woke up and saw my paycheck under light, and I promised to give the next day. But when the next day came, I couldn't drop a penny into one of those plastic &ldquo;help the children&rdquo; cans. I had to buy that lipstick and eye shadow. Lord, I went on and on, until I decided to get myself up here because I knew I was becoming a sinner  but I didn't feel it. And that's when I became scared. I had become one of those serial killers, traveling from Texas to California by way of Greyhound....
<> The heavy costume of memory disposed long ago, Only the light khaki shirt and shorts of Here and Now. Vulnerable they leave their bivouac, Armed with a carbine (light), with dread (heavy), And a flimsy net of silence laid over the stuttering mind. The heartless young men press coldly to the attack, They have forgotten us, they remember no Sundays, Only the daily jungle, the immediate marriage of war. They claim no country, no comrade, they never look back, Their staring eyes refuse our photograph, Are shut to all but the gun-sight's calculation. Death is the easiest footprint to find in their trackless track, The dusty young men lying old and blind, Death closing all but their staring home-town eyes.
After this poem, perhaps it is evening. Perhaps I am pleasantly tired? More likely I'm knackered. Perhaps The near ocean resuming its sound Like the endless unzipping of silk Will incite me to bed, or perhaps I will feel like a drink: but in fact It is simply a walk I require  A mile down streets the effort seems To have rinsed of its language for once, To replace it with breathable air. Across cool mats of sodium Spread by the streetlights, I drift Past benches upholstered with shadow, The drivers asleep in their whispering cabs And the girls who are tired from dancing, Who lean under trees holding shoes, And I find I am glad when the facts Can be empty of all but themselves: Which is when I remember the others. Indoors and unlucky this evening They shout at the walls through the smoke As the paper goes blank on their desks. Some have given up, and staring out Could see me as I pause below, A character the yawning moon Declines to animate tonight, While others burn the dictionary and drink, And the rest persevere through a dead-shift Attended by coffee and heartburn, Afraid after all they have nothing to say, Afraid that tautology rules, O.K. They'd never believe it if I Were to affer this alingual walk As a proof that the thing will emerge, The mad cousin of what they imagined, Imperfect, but able to tell you its name And blessed, it appears, with a personal cry. They'd never believe it. Me neither.
fishbroth skim off the topscupper albumineggwhite stiffening the sheet running down her leg viscousthick enough for a soup stock she sits on the toilet while I lift my prick into the sink and wash it gently pat it put it into my shorts &ldquo;Oh let me do it,&rdquo; she reaches out from the seat &ldquo;dear sweet creatures,&rdquo; she kisses my balls through the cloth and she's ready for moreright now or if not she has energy enough to swim a lake or climb a mountain or clean a closet
St. John, as Duvet's angel leads him (roused from his arbor beyond the rivers' moored boats and conversing swans) through clouds, above the earthly orchards, writes as he walks. But when he reaches burnished Jerusalem, thronged with the bless&egrave;d, most of them upward-gazing in adoration, some leaning their arms on a balustrade to dreamily scan implicit horizons level with their celestial vantage-point, he kneels wordless, gazing too upward, outward, back at the angel (now behind him), downward, inward  his ink-bottle slung at his hip as before, but his notebook vanished, perhaps discarded.
&lsquo;North and then north and north again we sailed, not that God is in the north or the south but that the north is great and strange, a mouth of baleen filtering the unknown, veiled spoutings and sportings, curtains of white cold. I made a map, I made a map of it. Here I have bristly Scotland, almost split in two, what sea-lochs and rough marches, old forts, new courts, when Alexander their king is dead will they live in love and peace, get bearings, trace mountains, count stars, take capes, straits in their stride as well as crop and shop, bring luck home?  <>
We climbed by the old quarries to the wide highland of heath, On the slope of a swale a giant dolmen, Three heavy basalt pillars upholding the enormous slab, Towers and abides as if time were nothing. The hard stones are hardly dusted with lichen in nobody knows What ages of autumns in this high solitude Since a recordless tribe of an unknown race lifted them up To be the availing hero's memorial, And temple of his power. They gathered their slighter dead from the biting Winds of time in his lee, the wide moor About him is swollen with barrows and breaks upon many stones, Lean gray guardians of old urned ashes, In waves on waves of purple heather and blithe spray of its bells. Here lies the hero, more than half God, And nobody knows his name nor his race, in the bee-bright necropolis, With the stone circle and his tribe around him. Sometimes perhaps (but who'd confess it?) in soft adolescence We used to wonder at the world, and have wished To hear some final harmony resolve the discords of life?  Here they are all perfectly resolved.
Seventy-seven betrayers will stand by the road, And those who love you will be few but stronger. Seventy-seven betrayers, skilful and various, But do not fear them: they are unimportant. You must learn soon, soon, that despite Judas The great betrayals are impersonal (Though many would be Judas, having the will And the capacity, but few the courage). You must learn soon, soon, that even love Can be no shield against the abstract demons: Time, cold and fire, and the law of pain, The law of things falling, and the law of forgetting. The messengers, of faces and names known Or of forms familiar, are innocent.
O Christ, who in Gethsemane  Didst all alone in anguish pray, &ldquo;Father, if it be possible,  Let this cup, Father, pass away,&rdquo;  O holy Christ, who rose serene,  Sublime in victory to cry, &ldquo;Not as I will, but as Thou wilt!&rdquo;  Let us in faith on Thee rely. Did not the stars in far off space,  Upon their silver axes pause To hear those words? Was not the air  Calmed by the myst'ry and its cause? O Christ, veiled in Humanity!  O Victor over deepest woe! When we, like Thee, endure the pain,  Let us, like Thee, submission know. Grant us a vict'ry like to Thine,  O'er all the storms that rage within. Teach us, O Christ, we humbly pray,  The trust that fain would conquer sin. And when life's discords all are hushed,  Blended in perfect harmony, Call us, O pitying Son of God,  Take us, O blessed Christ, to Thee!
So when for the once in a life I again find you,   And my heart says  And my mind had already gone without being told to,   And my heart is free, or free with a single bound, And the ones of the past are hobbies of rainy summers,   And the ones of the future hurry away like spies, And the interested draw near and go smirking from us,   For life is us and the rest well-intentioned lies, What I shall do is rush from my home right here,   And lose no time in packing or food or the fare, But grin in the mirror, vanish and reappear   Under the clock on King of the Castle Square. King of the Castle Square will be dark with men    It always is, the wives are about their meals  It's the men who muster to march and who say when   To start out for the Dirty Rascal Fields. The Dirty Rascal Fields are the homes of any   Who run away, you watch, they are never there. The men believe they are organised and many,   They leave the world so often and so bare. As the march begins, I will dash to the very top,   And whom will I find but the leader of all these men, And what will I do but demand of him that he stop,   And what will he say but  His sash I will take, his sash with the things it means,   I'll snip it away and be gone where it doesn't mean them, And find where you live down narrow unchanging lanes   No man with a sash has marched on, none has seen them, And you I will wrap in the sash if it goes with you    If it doesn't I'll find some other parade to run with  We'll wait on deserted fields in the first of blue   For what remains of the men when the marching's done with.
Out-worn heart, in a time out-worn, Come clear of the nets of wrong and right; Laugh, heart, again in the grey twilight, Sigh, heart, again in the dew of the morn. Your mother Eire is always young, Dew ever shining and twilight grey; Though hope fall from you and love decay, Burning in fires of a slanderous tongue. Come, heart, where hill is heaped upon hill: For there the mystical brotherhood Of sun and moon and hollow and wood And river and stream work out their will; And God stands winding His lonely horn, And time and the world are ever in flight; And love is less kind than the grey twilight, And hope is less dear than the dew of the morn.
Because I can't concentrate, I have a problem with transformations. If you are a god, and want to change into something else  a bull for example, or a swan  you have to make up your mind to think only about that. I begin all right but soon my mind wanders, and I'll remember torches in Lisbon or the sound of flutes and gongs or a woman's voice  someone I overheard once saying  <> Rogue whistles from the shadows are always sounding in my ears too. And night figures appear, big ones with seasons of their own. Always, I listen to what they say. And afterward will hear roars and ships' bells and the smallest newest crickets and the buzz a power saw makes in the woods. All my life it has been like this. One distraction, then another.
Who knows where the joy goes Knows we're killing the dolphins Somewhere far out to sea. Caught in the tuna nets The gentle dolphins drown, They, no man's enemy. (Go down grace, go down Freedom.) Who wakes from a nightmare Hearing a faint scream Knows terror at work Somewhere far away. (Go down grace, go down Gentleness.) Who weeps without reason In a sudden seizure Hears a terrible silence Half the world away. Is the last dolphin dying? Is there no friend left? Are we here alone?
A. A violent order is disorder; and B. A great disorder is an order. These Two things are one. (Pages of illustrations.) If all the green of spring was blue, and it is; If the flowers of South Africa were bright On the tables of Connecticut, and they are; If Englishmen lived without tea in Ceylon, and they do; And if it all went on in an orderly way, And it does; a law of inherent opposites, Of essential unity, is as pleasant as port, As pleasant as the brush-strokes of a bough, An upper, particular bough in, say, Marchand. After all the pretty contrast of life and death Proves that these opposite things partake of one, At least that was the theory, when bishops' books Resolved the world. We cannot go back to that. The squirming facts exceed the squamous mind, If one may say so. And yet relation appears, A small relation expanding like the shade Of a cloud on sand, a shape on the side of a hill. A. Well, an old order is a violent one. This proves nothing. Just one more truth, one more Element in the immense disorder of truths. B. It is April as I write. The wind Is blowing after days of constant rain. All this, of course, will come to summer soon. But suppose the disorder of truths should ever come To an order, most Plantagenet, most fixed ... A great disorder is an order. Now, A And B are not like statuary, posed For a vista in the Louvre. They are things chalked On the sidewalk so that the pensive man may see. The pensive man ... He sees that eagle float For which the intricate Alps are a single nest.
Of course that doesn't mean anything by itself. You'd have to look into one to be qualified, and even then your impressions would be provisional, and I know you well enough  parsimonious pepper pot but who would want that kind of temptation around the house, there's work to do, there's so much stuff as it is to pick up from the floor, polliwogs, firecrackers, shrapnel of all kinds. And my studies, Retro- gression and the Requiem Shark, to name but one area I am immersed in, and there must be at least ten others, so a beautiful new mirror is really out of the question. And yet there is at least one part of me that would like letting go, adios lifeboat, adieu palm-lined avenues, old rabbit's foot you mean nothing to me now. And what then? Oscillate through the underlife, no projects, no deadlines, family or friends  that's no way to travel, save for the dead and they have little choice in the matter. And, besides, I know what I look like, I've caught glimpses of a hungry, stalking thing, or a weak and wretched creature about to drop. None of that interests me. A very funny sight is a flamingo having its lunch upside down in the water.
We greet thee now upon this festal morn, O Friend of Freedom! thou who in those days When human rights were scorned and Justice slept, Though loud the bondman cried, didst dare to raise Thy voice to aid the lowly. Many a soul Was roused to nobler thinking, many a heart Impelled to braver doing by thy words, And in the contest fitted to bear part. We read, and lo! a vision rises there. Who is't comes here? A hero crowned with bay? Ah, no! a slave in chains, of meekest mien, Treading with patient step a thorny way. 'Tis Uncle Tom, sad Uncle Tom! He turns, He backward points, and what do we descry? Unnumbered hosts in shackles, bleeding, torn, To whom it were a blessing but to die. Anon the vision passes! and we see Another host, a smiling, happy band. The chains are torn away, and chants of praise Vibrate along the mountains, through the land. Such was the boon that thou didst help to give, O noble woman! and as years fleet by, Does not the thought of ransomed Uncle Toms Moisten with tears of thankfulness thine eye? For surely naught can e'er avail to check A blessed influence: it still will live While the majestic stars in solemn rhythm Wheel in their mighty orbits. What could give Such impulse unto Justice as the scenes On thy pathetic pages? Who could learn The story of that rare, heroic life, And not with deepest indignation burn? The nation's shame was lifted by the force Of words like thine, far more than by decrees Of lordliest statesmen in their councils grave. And when war's din had ceased, and on the breeze The silv'ry cadence of fair Freedom's chimes Rang out in joyful measures, was the peal Not sweeter for the work that thou hadst done? Whose worth the coming years will still reveal. So may thy birthday be all bright with bloom Of happy thoughts, and from the stirring past May sweetest mem'ries come of those brave deeds For Freedom ventured. Lo! time speedeth fast, And loved ones haste again with greeting glad. And as around they flock their gifts to lay Before thy feet, our dearest prayer is this: God's peace be thine upon thy natal day!
<> Go through the gate, walk three paces, Past the maple into the corner, By the fence where the sun comes up; She planned for rosettes of buttercup And the prideish ruff of Queen Anne's laces. Nobody ever thought to warn her She must do more than water and weed With one eye on the garden gate And both ears pricked to hear its creaking, And one eye on the curl of lane, And one hand smoothing her Sunday dress. Nobody warned her that unless She stopped her mooning and stopped her seeking For someone who'd never come again, The posies would scorn to bloom; too late She learned that silly tears were not Meant to water a garden plot. She wrung her hands, but what could she do? Nothing blossomed but dusty rue.
Piles of rock balls used for ammo then could still be fun, or rooms where guards got drunk, stone mugs and tough wood tables still intact. We order coffee made with a machine that gleams the name of some firm in Milan. Had Tosca jumped from where they claim, she would have splatted by that taxi in the street. Banquets lasted days, meat roasted black to gnaw on after girls and endless wine. When gluttony and love had turned them mean, they brought the sadist and the virgins in. Where they dropped the bores in the canal is grated, and a horny guard points out the best of the pornography above. Popes came puffing down that wall to hide where cruelty and orgy used to blend before they locked the drawbridge down, burned invitations, charged admission, found if everyone came in that no one had a knife or thought, or was interesting. They fired guards and opened dungeons so touring girls from Iowa can peek. Cruelty is what a land endures before it's clean. Years of torture here fan out from us, brown miles of monument and dome, pigeons rising pink in haze and broken women scattered on the stream. We stand on stone and holy violence of men, and even late in afternoon, Rome seen from a parapet is always dawn.
This is their trumpet ripe and rounded, They have burnt the wheat and gathered the chaff, And we that have fought them, we that have watched them, Have we at least not cause to laugh? Never so low at least we stumbled  Dead we have been but not so dead As these that live on the life they squandered, As these that drink of the blood they shed. We never boasted the thing we blundered, We never flaunted the thing that fails, We never quailed from the living laughter, To howl to the dead who tell no tales. 'Twas another finger at least that pointed Our wasted men or our emptied bags, It was not we that sounded the trumpet In front of the triumph of wrecks and rags. Fear not these, they have made their bargain, They have counted the cost of the last of raids, They have staked their lives on the things that live not, They have burnt their house for a fire that fades. Five years ago and we might have feared them, Been drubbed by the coward and taught by the dunce; Truth may endure and be told and re-echoed, But a lie can never be young but once. Five years ago and we might have feared them; Now, when they lift the laurelled brow, There shall naught go up from our hosts assembled But a laugh like thunder. We know them now.
<> How like a shower of moonlight-crusted beams Of textile form compact, whose veins run stars,  Discovered goddess of what naked loves!  Maiden of dreams and aromatic sleep, Thou liest. Thy long instrument against Thy god-voluptuous sensuousness of hip Pure iridescent pearl of ocean slopes: Tempestuous silent color-melodies Pulse glimmering from it beaten by the moon,  Soft songs the white hands of white shadows touch.  Magnetic star set slumberous over night, Watch with me this superior star of Earth Good Heaven was kind to grant me: Trembler, Like some soft bird, dream, while I sing to thee  Dream, languid ardor, my Dulcinea, dream.
The thighs are multifarious, awaiting pure note. Perianth, wafer, foil, leaf: floriferous moment praising itself as it dies, glass in the euphonious voice. I found my body in the fossil of a shell. In sand verbena, in the sea lily. A fish lay down in clay: it was the beginnings of my own skeleton. Seeded by the wind, I rose as roots, flowers from shoals of sand. Slowly, a sea anemone parted; my thighs, echoing, could not contain their ornamental sting. The sea's on my tongue like a sugar pill, a thorn, a salt-smell, a hook I take down. This is why I've put the sea in a bric-a-brac box. This is why I do not mean to let it out.
I have no clock, yet I can hear The minutes pass while I sit here Tired but free from tedium And mark the waning cylinder. To-morrow will be another day, And to-day will then be yesterday, To click the bonds of business From Saturday to Saturday. Another night will follow, but My candle will then be a candle butt And the door that is day and day's division Will have opened once and shut. Close your armoured books and mark The waning cylinder that drips Fluid time from pallid lips, Making an island in the dark. This island is too small, I fear; Dark horses fret away the shore, And I can build no breakwater But only close a desperate ear And mark the waning cylinder. The candle in his white grave-clothes, always turning his cowled  head, Stood in his own shadow at the foot of my grave-bed; Ho, said the candle with his rich dark beard, How they howl like the dead! And wagging his cowled head, Ho, said the candle, they would make a body afeard.
cars on the road far off night turned look raise up the dead the sun comes the earth goes how many trees motions gathering imperceptible birds drive hungry settle tides creeks stem
Upon the Siren-haunted seas, between Fate's mythic shores, Within a world of moon and mist, where dusk and daylight wed, I see a phantom galley and its hull is banked with oars, With ghostly oars that move to song, a song of dreams long dead:   &ldquo;Oh, we are sick of rowing here!   With toil our arms are numb;  With smiting year on weary year   Salt-furrows of the foam:  Our journey's end is never near,   And will no nearer come   Beyond our reach the shores appear   Of far Elysium.&rdquo; Within a land of cataracts and mountains old, and sand, Beneath whose heavens ruins rise, o'er which the stars burn red, I see a spectral cavalcade with crucifix in hand And shadowy armor march and sing, a song of dreams long dead:   &ldquo;Oh, we are weary marching on!   Our limbs are travel-worn;  With cross and sword from dawn to dawn   We wend with raiment torn:  The leagues to go, the leagues we 've gone   Are sand and rock and thorn   The way is long to Avalon   Beyond the deeps of morn.&rdquo; They are the curs'd! the souls who yearn and evermore pursue The vision of a vain desire, a splendor far ahead; To whom God gives the poet's dream without the grasp to do, The artist's hope without the scope between the quick and dead:   I, too, am weary toiling where   The winds and waters beat;  When shall I ease the oar I bear   And rest my tired feet?  When will the white moons cease to glare,   The red suns veil their heat?  And from the heights blow sweet the air   Of Love's divine retreat?
how apparent, cloudy big ideals the worth something then what the madness and blood the warmth of families is earthheld home someone far away a stretch within walls skyrainsun by the sea cossacks down the steps silence this side
You have to pay him for a rerun of the videotape, $5 for a single feature: &ldquo;All the things you are&rdquo; you are: what is the function of light? and how to see? For a boy on the street in 1920 you don't need art supplies, some colored chalk for hopscotch, the pigeon-toed balls of the feet. On a Guggenheim you don't figure a white dress on a black woman's wedding day is really subject matter for the  but she enters the shadow anyway. Was the coffee-can lens you made into an enlarger Maxwell House? At Cooper Union no names were called, nothing called back as you went uptown, in the shadows the high hat of the drumset too out of balance to adjust, too sweet for the accents of color. Full Tones: a fool for expression, the hues of the neighborhood, a social self steeped in the luck of life force, the vital music. To see some fingers on a man like Coltrane or Bags; the long exquisite glassmakers of exorcism, the black hole of Kamoinge. At the Studio Museum you're alive at tuxedo junction, Sherry your corsage; in the shadow is the bicycle, files of negatives in the basement, and in the open spaces of the Savoy, dancers where &ldquo;Lester Leaps In.&rdquo;
In the eel-thin belly of the Metro Swearingen banking in late afternoon over Boston Harbor, the islands eleven lily pads, my life loose as a frog's, I try to decipher the meaning of hope rising up again making music in me all the way from Scranton where the slag heaps stand like sentries shot dead at their posts. Hope rising up in my Saab hatchback, one hundred thousand honest miles on it as I speed due north from LaBell's cut-rate autopark to my spiny hillside farm in New Hampshire. March 21st. Snow still frosts the manure heap and flurries lace the horses' ample rumps but in here it's Stephen Foster coming back to me unexpurgated, guileless, all by heart. 'Tis summer, the darkies are gay, we sang in Miss Dupree's fifth grade in a suburb that I fled long ago. Gone are my friends from the cotton fields away to an allusion that escaped me a better land I know. O the melancholia as I too longed to depart. Now I belt out Massa's in de cold cold ground and all the darkies are a'weepin on Route I-93 but what I think of are the French-pastel mornings daylit at five in my own hills in June when I may leap up naked, happy, with no more premonition than the mother of the Pope had. How the same old pump of joy restarts for me, going home! What I understand from travel is how luck hangs in the lefthand lane fifteen miles over the limit and no cop, no drunk, no ice slick. Only the lightweight ghosts of racist lyrics soaring from my throat in common time. Last week leaving Orlando in a steep climb my seatmate told me flying horses must be loaded facing the tail of the plane so they may brace themselves at takeoff. Otherwise you run the risk they'll panic, pitch over backward, smash their hocks. Landing, said the groom, there is little we can do for them except pray for calm winds and ask the pilot to make a long approach. O brace me, my groom. Pray for calm winds. Carry me back safely where the snow stands deep in March. I'm going home the old way with a light hand on the reins making the long approach.
<> In Mexico, the stone land, Squirming and speaking: Death Stands, beyond your great eyes, Moving upon the bronze screen. Do not sever me, lest the world Be crushed below light and dark: But choose among you, speak In your rushing voices, elect Fire on the bitten corn, or the mirage Of earthquake in the gardens ... They drew the crucifix with their brown hands And there in the light under them the child Withered and spoke no more. A sign told by the people at their fountains.
On the rough mountain wind  That blows so free Rides a little storm-sprite  Whose name is Willaree. The fleecy cloudlets are not his,  No shepherd is he, For he drives the shaggy thunderclouds  Over land and sea. His home is on the mountain-top  Where I love to be, Amid grey rocks and brambles  And the red rowan-tree. He whistles down the chimney,  He whistles to me, And I send greeting back to him  Whistling cheerily. The great elms are battling,  Waves are on the sea, Loud roars the mountain-wind   God rest you, Willaree!
<> Here is a perfect power lost to earth, A mighty passion lightly, falsely placed, So that it loses dignity and worth. Here is the breath of summer gone astray, Lilac where lilac never ought to be, The ashes of a beauty swept away, And roses blooming in obscurity. I see your body strong in inner power; I see your soul made radiant with beauty, That dares to cast a shadow on its flower And sell its freedom for a fancied duty. My dear, what right have you each day to die In little ways because your heart is shy?
I followed the narrow cliffside trail half way up the mountain Above the deep river-canyon. There was a little cataract crossed the path, flinging itself Over tree roots and rocks, shaking the jewelled fern-fronds, bright bubbling water Pure from the mountain, but a bad smell came up. Wondering at it I clambered down the steep stream Some forty feet, and found in the midst of bush-oak and laurel, Hung like a bird's nest on the precipice brink a small hidden clearing, Grass and a shallow pool. But all about there were bones lying in the grass, clean bones and stinking bones, Antlers and bones: I understood that the place was a refuge for wounded deer; there are so many Hurt ones escape the hunters and limp away to lie hidden; here they have water for the awful thirst And peace to die in; dense green laurel and grim cliff Make sanctuary, and a sweet wind blows upward from the deep gorge. I wish my bones were with theirs. But that's a foolish thing to confess, and a little cowardly. We know that life Is on the whole quite equally good and bad, mostly gray neutral, and can be endured To the dim end, no matter what magic of grass, water and precipice, and pain of wounds, Makes death look dear. We have been given life and have used it not a great gift perhaps-but in honesty Should use it all. Mine's empty since my love died Empty? The flame-haired grandchild with great blue eyes That look like hers? What can I do for the child? I gaze at her and wonder what sort of man In the fall of the world ... I am growing old, that is the trouble. My children and little grandchildren Will find their way, and why should I wait ten years yet, having lived sixty-seven, ten years more or less, Before I crawl out on a ledge of rock and die snapping, like a wolf Who has lost his mate? I am bound by my own thirty-year-old decision: who drinks the wine Should take the dregs; even in the bitter lees and sediment New discovery may lie. The deer in that beautiful place lay down their bones: I must wear mine.
There's a small red fly that swims into airless administrative offices through the screens of video terminals like a bloodshot eye moving through the looking glass backwards a uniform light that shines into the retina from a Wonderland whose prize is not the expanding of vision but the sting of disability glare
Over my shoulder, to the left, the left what's left of the moon: a slivery-edged scoop of silver light coming at me sideways this morning in its happiness aspect. And what is happiness but the secret teachings of sorrow turned inside out, flipped like a fallen coin landed to stand on its in-between?  The sound of glass against the wash basin I drink from.  in my hands letting go of all pasts in this friendly new bathroom. Being in this rented room, in this ranch- like orchard house, with farms to smell, and getting a last look at the old moon is newness renewing itself. It's morning in America, palomino moon. I could straddle and ride you cool across these misty Zen hills greened over with glens and lightning dips. We'd gallop clear down to the sea. This global daybreak, straight along Highway 1, your golden mane of light streams back at me, warming and tickling my washed, facial vision: a horse-powered moon with no shoulder to pull over or cry on in either direction.
It isn't the body That's a stranger. It's someone else. We poke the same Ugly mug At the world. When I scratch, He scratches too. There are women Who claim to have held him. A dog follows me about. It might be his. If I'm quiet, he's quieter. So I forget him. Yet, as I bend down To tie my shoelaces, He's standing up. We cast a single shadow. Whose shadow? I'd like to say: &ldquo;He was in the beginning And he'll be in the end,&rdquo; But one can't be sure. At night As I sit Shuffling the cards of our silence, I say to him: &ldquo;Though you utter Every one of my words, You are a stranger. It's time you spoke.&rdquo;
There is not much that he would ask for now. The axe whirls in the air, pauses, descends, Is buried deep in hardened locust fiber. The slender handle quivers for a while And then subsides. A broadened boyish smile Lights up a face already glistening From mist of sweat spread over ebony. To novices who know so little how A toughened log is split, who blundering Excite derision with their futile swings And glancing blows, he darts a look of pride; And self content distends his large eyes wide. What have we then that such a one can need? The woods are his. He names each separate tree And lives in intimacy such as we Shall never know. The quietness is his, The self sufficiency, and the raw strength.... And for a moment this is quite enough To see the quivering of a shapely helve Pine white against the brown of last year's leaves This is his day, his day of secrets hid. Oh, never hope to manage half as well!... His firm black arms, bare to the shoulders, and His well set, high powered body, all these tell His mastery to him, as well to us. A sculptor here could find the very model From which to carve a statue setting forth <> Makes man persist in holding on to Faith. This husky, blueclad oldster, shining black With dull thick hair, and widened happy eyes Sure of his prowess, has in his own way Things to reveal. Watch how the lengthy swing Of axe brings all the muscles into play; Yet without haste, or waste, or rest. We who Belie ourselves in febrile gesturing For praise, might learn from him, although we are wide. He has done well what he was there to do. Well, and with finish. There is nothing more.
Chicks, noises Like insects Transistors Playing pop-music (Pop music is Bad) Dogs are bad At night Woof, woof, Woof, woof, woof Resounding against The architecture Cocks Will crow and crow (Cats Are very discreet Children, Not) Worst is Motor-cars  Taxis. Piff Piff. I want a machine-gun.
It was nearly morning when the giant Reached the tree of children. Their faces shone like white apples On the cold dark branches And their dresses and little coats Made sodden gestures in the wind. He did not laugh or weep or stamp His heavy feet. He set to work at once Lifting them tenderly down Into a straw basket which was fixed By a golden strap to his shoulder. Only one did he drop a soft pretty child Whose hair was the color of watered milk. She fell into the long grass And he could not find her Though he searched until his fingers Bled and the full light came. He shook his fist at the sky and called God a bitter name. But no answer was made and the giant Got down on his knees before the tree And putting his hands about the trunk Shook Until all the children had fallen Into the grass. Then he pranced and stamped Them to jelly. And still he felt no peace. He took his half-full basket and set it afire, Holding it by the handle until Everything had been burned. He saw now Two men on steaming horses approaching From the direction of the world And taking a little silver flute Out of his pocket he played tune After tune until they came up to him.
Yours is the sullen sorrow,  The disgrace is also mine; Your love was intense and thorough, Mine was the love of a growing flower  For the sunshine. You had the power to explore me,  Blossom me stalk by stalk; You woke my spirit, you bore me To consciousness, you gave me the dour  Awareness then I suffered a balk. Body to body I could not  Love you, although I would. We kissed, we kissed though we should not. You yielded, we threw the last cast,  And it was no good. You only endured, and it broke  My craftsman's nerve. No flesh responded to my stroke; So I failed to give you the last  Fine torture you did deserve. You are shapely, you are adorned  But opaque and null in the flesh; Who, had I but pierced with the thorned Full anguish, perhaps had been cast  In a lovely illumined mesh Like a painted window; the best  Fire passed through your flesh, Undrossed it, and left it blest In clean new awareness. But now  Who shall take you afresh? Now who will burn you free  From your body's deadness and dross? Since the fire has failed in me, What man will stoop in your flesh to plough  The shrieking cross? A mute, nearly beautiful thing  Is your face, that fills me with shame As I see it hardening; I should have been cruel enough to bring  You through the flame.
My father in a dream he lay thin, narrow, bony on a double bed and fiercely jabbing the naked floorboards muttered <> I didn't understand him. Perhaps he's dying, I thought, wants to be buried here. Sadly, to reassure him of his wish, I smiled but now he cringed, all knees and elbows to the wall, quiet, as if he'd heard me thinking. I think I frightened him. It hadn't been himself he meant to bury.
The car sways at eighty miles an hour; the road slants down from the center, a banked track, between Montreal and the Canadian border. A black pigeon is caught in the spokes of the grillwork, and with his parting feathers, dies there; slowly he ferments, sweeter than the windshield insects. I had expected great tundra changes, leaves greener, fat, the trees shedding to a purer sky in its blankness. It is so much the same. Customs, and their searching, has not stung this dream; the miles I put between us are simply Canadian miles, foreign and familiar, and no distance at all.
As I went up the Blue Ridge I came by Barton Stone, And the night was a night of leaves and light Through leafless spaces blown. I passed into the deep forest, And the dark night closed me round; The dark spray flung its mist in my eyes, The boughs crashed, and I found A level space of dew and grass Under a quiet moon, And in the broken shade a dwarf Plucking a quiet tune. Straight from his crooked back uprose The chestnut's shaggy bark, And over his wizened pallor fell Stray fragments of the dark. And where no leaves withheld the moon A lovely lady was, Pacing a dance whose edges swept The edges of the grass. With flowers her loosened hair was bound, And broken laurel buds; Her sleeves were green as the leaves are green That stir in the inner woods. &ldquo;And who are you, sweet lady, That dance alone by night, With shivering veils of silken green And hair like a shadowy light? &ldquo;Your sisters died in England  Three hundred years are gone  And never a ship could cleave the seas 'Twixt darkening east and dawn. &ldquo;Oh! who are you, sweet lady, Green-clad, with lightsome foot, Who touch nor crush the white mushroom That grows at the chestnut root?&rdquo; But still she danced, and still she danced, And not a sound was there, But the pressed grass and the plucked lute Making a plaintive air. And still she danced, and her courtseys were As boughs that feel the rain; Danced, and the fluttering silks were leaves When the light has come again, Swept low with waving arms and left The leaves and the moon-swept green And a gnarled and twisted chestnut root Where the crooked dwarf had been.
First and zillionth my eyes meet eyes   unturnable from, unstarable in. Whoever was marched from the Square of my reason and to what court, I don't give a hyphen   va t'en to the King! Our drapeaux are waving and what's in the offing   but tears, tribunals and unwelcome aid? Nothing but glorious, jealous, incredulous, bibulous, fabulous, devil'll envy us   love made, love made! &lsquo;Yeah,&rsquo; but you say, with the Press of the planet   &lsquo;Look how it turns out: the heroes felled in the upshot, the oiliest climb of the customary bourgeois fuckers as easy as muttering   argent, ackers, geld ...&rsquo; Uh-huh, sans doute. But here at the heart   of the movement I trust my hand in another! So CNN tells me I'm odds-on to cop it? That ain't news, guys, I did arrive here   via a mother. No, when the Square is dead again, but   for some oligarchy or puppet or shah, and I'm banged up and on trial in slippers for following, wishing on, crediting, catching   her my star  don't do the pity. All right, do the pity,   but that won't happen, believe it from me! Her eyes are as hot as one needs to ignite the cave in the human guy. I am hers,   friends, I am history!
Understand that they were sitting just inside the door At a little table with two full beers and two empties. There were a few dozen people moving around, killing Time and getting tight because nothing meant anything Anymore Somebody looked at a girl and somebody said Great things doing in Spain But she didn't even look up, not so much as half an eye. Then Jack picked up his beer and Nellie her beer And their legs ground together under the table. Somebody looked at the clock and somebody said Great things doing in Russia A cop and two whores came in and he bought only two drinks Because one of them had syphilis No one knew just why it happened or whether It would happen ever again on this fretful earth But Jack picked up his beer again and Nellie her beer again And, as though at signal, a little man hurried in, Crossed to the bar and said Hello Steve to the barkeeper.
Sister Ann and the new priest who run and wave their arms toward him are like the boy's nightmare of his parents screaming and turning to black cloth. The bees! They shout: Get away from the bees in the tree! The small bodies swirl as hundreds swarm out: a depth which seems to the boy beautiful and frightening. He hates the nun and the priest. They think it is a sin to disobey them, to risk getting wrapped-up in the bees. Inside the swarm how do they breathe? In detention, he prays that God forgives. Sister Ann has carried a basket and a broom to the priest. They circle the tree; their sleeves are flapping in the wind. Hail Mary Full of Grace, the boy says, and the bees respond.
Sex isn't sin, ah no! sex isn't sin, nor is it dirty, not until the dirty mind pokes in. We shall do as we like, sin is obsolete, the young assert. Sin is obsolete, sin is obsolete, but not so dirt. And sex, alas, gets dirtier and dirtier, worked from the  mind. Sex gets dirtier and dirtier, the more it is fooled with, we  find. And dirt, if it isn't sin, is worse, especially dirt inside. If you're dirty inside you go rotten, and once rotten, woe  betide! Sex isn't sin, but dirty sex is worse, so there you are! Why don't you know what's what, young people? Seems  to me you're far duller than your grandmothers. But leave that aside. Let's be honest at last about sex, or show at least that we've  tried. Sex isn't sin, it's a delicate flow between women and men, and the sin is to damage the flow, force it or dirty it or  suppress it again. Sex isn't something you've got to play with; sex is  It's the flow of your life, it's your moving self, and you  are due to be true to the nature of it, its reserve, its sensitive pride that it always has to begin with, and by which you ought  to abide. Know yourself, O know yourself, that you are mortal; and  know the sensitive delicacy of your sex, in its ebbing to and fro, and the mortal reserve of your sex, as it stays in your  depths below. And don't, with the nasty, prying mind, drag it out from  its deeps and finger it and force it, and shatter the rhythm it keeps when it's left alone, as it stirs and rouses and sleeps. O know yourself, O know your sex! You must know, there  is no escape. You must know sex in order to save it, your deepest self,  from the rape of the itching mind and the mental self, with its pruriency  always agape.
Ah'll follow you, mah husban', thoo de thickes' ob de night, Thoo briah patch, thoo witch's cave, an' down de steep ravine; Ah'll comfo't you w'en trubble's bu'nin' you to ash an' dust An' you's a squ'min' in ol' Mastah Debbil's sin machine; Ah'll chase erway de clouds an' mak' de sun to shine by night, De stahs to run erroun' lak happy pickaninnies do; Ah'll wade thoo crick an' thoo de risin' ob de tide fu' you An' walk wid you in Beulahlan' w'en dis hyeah life am thoo. Ah'll follow you, mah husban', 'twell de stahs to earf do drap, A flutt'rin' lak de bu'ds de huntah shoot Octobah mo'n; Ah'll go wid you beyon' de aidge ob all dat Gawd calls good An' hide wid you behin' de stone w'en Gabr'ul toot his ho'n. Ah'll mak yo' pa'f as rosy as de gahden in de June, All drippin' wid de honey dew dat folkses call true love; Ah'll be to you what you have allus longed dat Ah should be, Yo' precious one, yo' angul chile, yo' faif'ul tu'tle dove.
Spy, Marlowe, cobbler's son he saw them As bosses he could puppet and exploit. He blew them up the better to condemn them. He loved his monsters. Jonson saw the point. Magnates, creeps, pushers: forced to move In competition, made his talent cope: A brilliant dwarf whom they could hate or love, Subscribe to in bound volumes: Mr Pope. Pity, bored pity, throwaway wincing From streets, shops, houses which he couldn't hate; He said love failed him to be more convincing  Our Larkin, laureate of the welfare state. Yet our statistical showbusiness age demands Something. Rebellion? Let the preachers Be expert, non-beat. &lsquo;The adolescent with red hands&rsquo; (Auden on Rimbaud). Not comprehensive teachers, Or poetry and jazz. Not all that stuff. Perhaps we shouldn't teach them. Enough is enough.
    And Herod said &lsquo;Sup- posing you had been in my shoes, what would you have Done different? I was not thinking of myself. This Child whichever number might have come from the hat could Scarcely have begun to make trouble for twenty or Thirty years at least, and by that time Ten to one I'd be dead and gone. What Matters is to keep a straight succession none can Argue about someone acceptable to the occupying Power, who nevertheless will enable us to pre- serve our sense of being a nation, Belonging and bound to one particular place. I know my people. They are nomads, only Squatters here as yet. They have never left the Wilderness. Wherever in Asia Minor the grass Seams a dune, or a well greens a wadi, or Sheep can feed long enough for a tent to be pitched, There they call home, praying for daily Manna and a nightly pillar of fire. They are Chronic exiles; their most-sung psalms look Back to the time of looking back. They never see Jerusalem in the here and now, but always long to Be where they've never been that they may long to Be where they really are.     If this child had Lived, they'd have started the same blind trek, prospecting In sand for their own footsteps. Yes, Mothers are weeping in the streets of Judea, but still the Streets are there to weep in. If that child had lived, Not a stone would have stayed on a stone, nor a brother with  brother, Nor would all the Babylons of all the world Have had water enough to swill away their tears.      I have put a stop to, at the price Of a two-year crop of children, making What future observers will undoubtedly judge a Good bargain with history.&rsquo;
Under black lace the bald skull shines and nods, A melon seasoned in this winter sun, Bare, yellowed, finial Above the claw-and-ball-foot chair that mourns North toward the frozen window and the bay. The gulls Rise in a long line off the rocks, steer For the lighthouse, shadowing the boats That toss, abandoned, far beyond the point. Dead fish are heaped upon the coast for miles. Her life is sleep, and pain. With wakening To this sequestered and snow-haunted world, The black mantilla creaks with frost; red eyes Break through the rinds of flesh, blur Toward the dripping faucet and the last cans of Spaghetti and baked beans, corroding on the shelves. A bubble, then a sound that borders on a word Breaks from her mouth. If she could think, Her eighty years would bend toward Spain  Shadows of  Plumes, awnings, shields, the sun six hours high ... She believes this coast is in the South. A month ago, Smoke from the village chimneys died. No lights burn In windows of the cottages. Over the vacant docks The birds are featureless, but her sight fails Where these walls end. Exile without remembrance, Spawned in the heat to perish in this cold, Ravaged by paresis, and her sight at last A blackness in the blood, she moves her chair Inch by excruciating inch, her face Steered raw, blank, aching toward the beans: The last survivor of the race.
<> The rose-winged motes that cluster but to fly  Even as they flame with Sun's resplendent dye  And, gilded, melt to azure airs, whence born Are the sweet wing&egrave;d moments of the thorn: Those woodland prayers no ear nor human eye Could understand. Theirs is such privacy As only rudest, blindest heart would scorn: One dewy hour with petals open thrown To woo the passing breeze and bumbling hum Of furry banded bees that love to own The honey of the thorn-rose; till they come He treads on sacred ground who early wakes All breathless lest he lose the transient charm And seeks the brier rose amid the brakes Before the weaving gnat with drowsy swarm Rises in answer to the blue fly's horn That starts the day and ends the early morn.
<> This time's imperative. And say farewell To the dear face of those who wish to die. Let those who are dying now Die quickly. Either die Or will to renew  (So to find, to attain a treble will, The mature, the resolute, the unshaken Heart) Renew At the source. Go to the source and return. Go, go quickly. Hurry. We are in Battle. Drop The life personal, dry pod Colored once, now drab, ready to split To scatter seed. Work to infuse The imperfect, the moribund With energy and delight. Go. Rouse. Energy calls forth Energy. Remember the teacher Who worked to prepare To cleanse, to remake, to arm You for this time. But if you persist in dying, die Quickly. No sluggards now For death and life both alternate hold The new, the arriving Change. This planet works, it stirs, It is busy. Make room For the enormous New. Daily The sun pours about the head and shoulders The expanding dawn, The enduring Light.
With an intelligence above meaning I have come again to these woods. It is not easy. I have no element but what I may rightfully take, and nothing seems in the smallest to bother, to wait for asking: And I desire not to impose anything, to move it past its own projection. Here, a tree is what it is: a testimony. Here, among shadows, I return humbly, fully towards myself. When one has centered in the broadest orchestration of trees, one has entered a great congress. The woods argue like a catechism the woods turn the mind in the woods now dark, now frosty instruct the middling, ever-safe to become appropriately excessive. It is all right. When the winds come, things fall.
The words won't scan. Initials, acronyms Are tidier though no less threatening: They claim it for bureaucracy, as if Depriving it of an imaginary life. I try: I sense it crazily adrift On a wild surge of involuntary current, Like the lost boat in a forgotten nursery rhyme. It had no choice in the matter, meant no harm. But see how it turns our calm world upside-down! Your comical pill-popping hypochondria Seems mere rehearsal for reality, Your lithe past an irrational vanity. So now your boast is: &lsquo;Look, I've put on weight.&rsquo; Your breakfasting on booze has given way To healthy muesli, yoghourt, wholemeal bread, Storing up strength for the wasted days ahead.
<> Throwing back your head, All America went past Black, and white, and red. Negroes writhed before us Weaving negro charms; Gypsies swayed and beckoned With sun-browned gypsy arms; Kansas farmers trod there, Cutting golden wheat; Then a Rachel-Jane bird Whispered, &ldquo;Sweet, Sweet.&rdquo; All the blatant noises Of our crowded states Chanted songs of freedom And democratic fates; While, high above the color, And high above the noise, You played with crumpled new moons And called them children's toys.
Our two small sons and one I love One night were growing merry there; I know not what we prattled of, But suddenly I was aware. It was as if a magic spell; It was as if a lurking might, That hovered there invisible, Stooped down and plucked me to a height. Below, as 'mid an ambush spread, One moment with our lighted room, The four of us were islanded In an unfathomable gloom. Till now at last, I could behold What on our solitude we press: It is our dear ones' smiles we fold About our spirits' loneliness,  That desolate the soul must mourn; And seeing this, I wondered why So lonely is each being born; And lonely does each being die. Now light that leaped from every glance Was gathered, as by lens are rays: Until I saw, as in a trance, The room had burst into a blaze. I saw it all! I saw the room! I saw the sudden blaze now made Against the Dark (with lust for Doom) A flimsy, match-box barricade. O lips and eyes that kindle glory! O lovely respite that I've won! O protest that is transitory! Brief refuge from oblivion! O little room with little light! O tiny, evanescent spark! I see you, see you, as my bright, Final defense against the Dark!
The angel said to me: &ldquo;Why are you laughing?&rdquo; &ldquo;Laughing! Not me! Who was laughing? I did not laugh. It was A cough. I was coughing. Only hyenas laugh. It was the cold I caught nine minutes after Abraham married me: when I saw How I was slender and beautiful, more and more Slender and beautiful. I was also Clearing my throat; something inside of me Is continually telling me something I do not wish to hear: A joke: A big joke: But the joke is always just on me. He said: you will have more children than the sky's stars And the seashore's sands, if you just wait patiently. Wait: patiently: ninety years? You see The joke's on me!&rdquo;
Ice-cold fear has slowly decreased As my bones have grown, my height increased. Though I shiver in snow of dreams, I shall never Freeze again in a noonday terror. I shall never break, my sinews crumble As God-the-headmaster's fingers fumble At the other side of unopening doors Which I watch for a hundred thousand years. I shall never feel my thin blood leak While darkness stretches a paw to strike Or Nothing beats an approaching drum Behind my back in a silent room. I shall never, alone, meet the end of my world At the bend of a path, the turn of a wall: Never, or once more only, and That will be once and an end of end.
All furniture's gone. It hits me in this light I've always hated thinned the way it is by tiny panes, when I leave now the door will slam no matter how I close it and my groin will throb hungry as these rooms. Someone left the snapshot on the wall, two horses and a man, a barn dark gray against gray light I think was sky but could be eighty years of fading. Once I called that unknown farmer friend. He stared back ignorant and cold until I blushed. What denies me love today helps me hold a job. This narrow space I slept in twenty years, a porch walled in, a room just barely added on. I own this and I know it is not mine. That day I found locked doors in Naples, streets rocked in the sea. The sea rocked in the hands of brutal sky and fish came raining from volcanoes. I see the horses swirl into the barn. I hear two shots, no groans. When I say I'm derelict the horses will return to flank the farmer. Again, the three die gray as April 7, 1892. I'll leave believing we keep all we lose and love. Dirt roads are hard to find. I need to walk one shabby some glamorous way the movies like. I'll rest at creeks. I can't help looking deep for trout in opaque pools. I pass a farm: it's home, eviction papers posted to the door, inside a fat ghost packing wine to celebrate his fear of quarantine, once outside, pleased the road he has to take goes north without an exit ramp, not one sign giving mileage to the end.
cold cold on the bold shore, as the rock falleth the water stands: beware of permanence, you who would run in, who, in yr thin shallops, think to make the land the season is forever cold, and the reason the rock (if you can call the mind Or is it from water that images come? And the boldness never to be ice, never to stand, never to go other than does the slow &amp; antient heart: to change is the expectation we previous immigrants tell you
He pours back the ink. They tried to erase from dictionaries of my awareness. Makes Lucille bleed blue. Makes her bend down/past nights of rapes. And cry/for chains her sons would wear. Cry/for rapes her daughters would endure. B. B. is the Bone Beat. King of Marrow. Pulsing wind in/side generations. He answers answers/with trembling affirmations. Calls Lucille/to some girl's pain. And he does not/even know her name. Makes her kneel seventeen stories be neath the floor/and cry. Pleads with her. It's my own fault, baby. He tells her: treat me any way/you want to. He pours back the ink.
<> old friend, whose friend, my friend, the trouble with you, who, he is, there, here, we were  The voice of the echo of time, the same &ldquo;I know you,&rdquo; no pain in that, we are all around what we are. (Re Bob's film, CUT) Pictures of the movement. Pictures of the red-headed man going down on  pictures of the red- haired man on the red- headed girl on the  pictures of the flat form cutting hair off, the long, the echoic scissors cutting.
The problem is to make the effort; Not to let the dumbness of the night around Oppress the springing of the unseen blood. Not to let the flux of uncreative doing Hide the emptiness of loud existence. The problem is to put our acts Upon a shelf in clean labelled bottles; To move within the depths And fill the sources of our daily being; To feed the roots Of our manhood's flowering; that resistance To amphibious foes Be fifty organised. The problem is to make the effort, Then leave the rest to weather and the rain.
After these years of lectures heard, Of papers read, of hopes deferred, Of days spent in the dark stacks In learning the impervious facts So well you can dispense with them, Now that the final day has come When you shall answer name and date Where fool and scholar judge your fate What have you gained? A learn&egrave;d grace And lines of knowledge on the face, A spirit weary but composed By true perceptions well-disposed, A soft voice and historic phrase Sounding the speech of Tudor  What ignorance cannot assail Or daily novelty amaze, Knowledge enforced by firm detail. What revels will these trials entail, What gentle wine confuse your head While gossip lingers on the dead Till all the questions wash away, For you have learned, not what to say, But how the saying must be said.
We stood side by side. Only George walked on. You spoke and I replied  but I had gone. My gone did not depend on anything you'd planned and I did not extend  even a hand. My gone was not the sort that might come back one day. It was less felt than thought  but most away. I looked the same to you, the arches and the cars, and you could not see through  my skin to bars. My arrow pointed north. Your word had lost its pass, so no more back and forth  from the hourglass. My face became a chart where pleasantries were drawn. The binman pulled his cart  around the lawn where we stood once removed, where we stand twice returned. Nothing can be improved  my gone has learned. Foolish to have supposed there might be other ways. Paint a closed window, closed  is how it stays. I am prepared to face how fleeting I have been to you and to this place,  that tree, the green circle of grass, the stone. From your first fixed-term kiss I knew I could not own  any of this.
Sometimes, oh, often, indeed, in the midst of ugly adversity, beautiful Memories return. You awake in wonder, you awake at half-past four, Wondering what wonder is in store. You reach for your clothes in the dark and pull them on, you have no time Even to wash your face, you have to climb Megunticook. You run through the sleeping town; you do not arouse Even a dog, you are so young and so light on your feet. What a way to live, what a way ... No breakfast, not even hungry. An apple, though, In the pocket. And the only people you meet are store-windows. The path up the mountain is stony and in places steep, And here it is really dark wonderful, wonderful, Wonderful the smell of bark And rotten leaves and dew! And nobody awake In all the world but you!  Who lie on a high cliff until your elbows ache, To see the sun come up over Penobscot Bay.
I said I splendidly loved you; it's not true.  Such long swift tides stir not a land-locked sea. On gods or fools the high risk falls on you   The clean clear bitter-sweet that's not for me. Love soars from earth to ecstasies unwist.  Love is flung Lucifer-like from Heaven to Hell. But there are wanderers in the middle mist,  Who cry for shadows, clutch, and cannot tell Whether they love at all, or, loving, whom:  An old song's lady, a fool in fancy dress, Or phantoms, or their own face on the gloom;  For love of Love, or from heart's loneliness. Pleasure's not theirs, nor pain. They doubt, and sigh  And do not love at all. Of these am I.
Poetry is a discourse. And we, its discouragees. If it's a world wide depression, everybody is depressed. Ah, but try to run a Gipsy through the ruins of time. My publisher says: at some people's readings, the crowd goes out and buys their books. At yours, they run out and steal them. Why would they want to steal the blackness of my dog, the mouth of my tomb? His body, full of morphine, expires on the cold cement floor of the jail, his cells are migrating. Adieu, dumb dog! Adieu, obnoxious individuality!
When dusk is drowned in drowsy dreams,  And slow the hues of sunset die;  When firefly and moth go by, And in still streams the new-moon gleams,   A sickle in the sky:  Then from the hills there comes a cry,   The owlet's cry: A shivering voice that sobs and screams,   That, frightened, screams:  &ldquo;Who is it, who is it, who? Who rides through the dusk and dew,  With a pair of horns,  As thin as thorns, And face a bubble-blue?  Who, who, who! Who is it, who is it, who?&rdquo; When night has dulled the lily's white,  And opened wide the moonflower's eyes,  When pale mists rise and veil the skies, And round the height in whispering flight   The night wind sounds and sighs:  Then in the woods again it cries,    The owlet cries: A shivering voice that calls in fright,   In maundering fright:  &ldquo;Who is it, who is it, who? Who walks with a shuffling shoe,  'Mid the gusty trees,  With a face none sees, And a form as ghostly too?  Who, who, who! Who is it, who is it, who?&rdquo; When midnight leans a listening ear  And tinkles on her insect lutes;  When 'mid the roots the cricket flutes, And marsh and mere, now far, now near,   A jack-o'-lantern foots:  Then o'er the pool again it hoots,   The owlet hoots: A voice that shivers as with fear,   That cries in fear:  &ldquo;Who is it, who is it, who? Who creeps with his glow-worm crew  Above the mire  With a corpse-light fire, As only dead men do?  Who, who, who! Who is it, who is it, who?&rdquo;
Sweet procession, rose-blue, and all them bells. Bandstand red, the eyes at treetop level seeing it. &lsquo;Are we what we think we are or are we what befalls us?&rsquo; The people from an open window the eyes seeing it!Daytime!Or twilight! Sweet procession, rose-blue. If we're here let's be here now. And the train whistle? who invented that? Lonesome man, wanted the trains to speak for him.
There is fog in a meadow where bluebirds Are wheeling and turning in the cold space: There are young plane trees in snow looking Like bell ropes that come out of low ceilings From nowhere: A thing can be desired only if it has An opposite to resist it. <> There could not be good without evil. There could not be a water crust in the well Or a white light high up in the oak groves. One warm summer night I Left a pail of milk Out on a windowsill to cool, and I sat down at my table with friends And put a lighted candle On the blue, plated back of a wood louse And announced that this plough horse of an insect Would soon cross over all the way to the opposite Edge of the table, but, you would say, what if the louse Having reached the other edge had flown off And out of the open window with Boehme's candle! Would there have been, then, two morning stars For your children? Late that night with the light of This candlestick I finished The sentence I had begun nearly a year ago. I wrote: and the ale is warm, as The wings of this almost colorless insect are beating With double vision, everywhere at once, the wings Have become a waterwheel barely Turning in a frozen stream beside a mill; The illusion of the wings, now, is solid Like a millstone  A starling screams out in the purple brambles, And can the beginning go to the end without Beginning again, not like my wood louse dragged Back again and again for my friends: How he beat his wings, but then The hot wax flooding down on him Caught him in its cold form and just Once more he painfully lifted his wings, and let Them fall as an angel, petals of an oxeye daisy, Or as two walls of a barn breaking in with heavy snow.
After her pills the girl slept and counted Pellet on pellet the regress of life. Dead to the world, the world's count yet counted Pellet on pill the antinomies of life. Refused to turn, the way's back, she counted Her several stones across the mire of life. And stones away and sticks away she counted To keep herself out of the country of life. Lost tally. How the sheep return to home Is the story she will retrieve And the only story believe Of one and one the sheep returning home To take the shapes of life, Coming and being counted.
what did Stevens do if he didn't make ships? as late as 1667, when signing the oath asked of all Americans then to pledge allegiance to a new English king, Stevens is listed as ship carpenter no &lsquo;wharf&rsquo; as such is known to have been his tho his descendents all come to play a leading part in the life of the Harbor especially his great- granddaughter Susanna who became the mother of David and William Pearce Stevens, tho the leading citizen, is all over the Cut: was, then, the &ldquo;Beach&rdquo; his private graving yard? or did he build at all? The question has that power in it, that previously to coming to Gloucester this man had built the largest ship then known in England and had been so desirable Spain's spies had sought to buy him, as they had earlier tried to John Hawkins he would have lived a life as large as John Winthrop Jr also refused but even colonially Stevens dwindled, on the face of the record I'm not sure he did He lived here on the front of the city 40 years, until the day he ran away, age 70, to wherever he did go The question stays: what did he do? did he contract vessels for out of Gloucester? what was ship-building, if Stevens did build, to bind his coming to the later act of Andrew Robinson or Ingersolls and Sanders? It stays, that not after so much of a break in time, the type of vessel which changed fishing from that point on was built or invented in Gloucester One wld say, not out of thin air. 1713, a schooner. 1693 Stevens dies, a ship builder. In those 20 years the Ingersolls the Sanders and Robinson are continuing ship building. Was Stevens not the head of something the winning thing  got hidden all the years?
Ah, little green eyes, Ah, little eyes of mine, Ah, Heaven be willing That you think of me somewise. The day of departure You came full of grieving And to see I was leaving The tears 'gan to start sure With the heavy torture Of sorrows unbrightened When you lie down at night and When there to you dreams rise, Ah, Heaven be willing That you think of me somewise. Deep is my assurance Of you, little green eyes, That in truth you realize Something of my durance Eyes of hope's fair assurance And good premonition By virtue of whose condition All green colors I prize. Ah, Heaven be willing That you think of me somewise. Would God I might know you To which quarter bended And why comprehended When sighings overflow you, And if you must go through Some certain despair, For that you lose his care Who was faithful always. Ah, Heaven be willing That you think of me these days. Through never a moment I've known how to live lest All my thoughts but as one pressed You-ward for their concernment. May God send chastisement If in this I belie me And if it truth be My own little green eyes. Ah, Heaven be willing That you think of me somewise.
Late October. It is afternoon. My daughter and I walk through the leaf-strewn Corridors of the park In the light and the dark Of the elms' thin arches. Around us brown leaves fall and spread. Small winds stir the minor dead. Dust powders the air. Those shrivelled women stare At us from their cold benches. Child, your mittens tug your sleeves. They lick your drumming feet, the leaves. You come so fast, so fast. You violate the past, My daughter, as your coat dances.
And so one night they came, in wild carouse, The father and the kinsmen of the boy, That young fiend shot. With never an &ldquo;Ahoy,&rdquo; They shot into the windows of that house, And burnt the barn and in it all the cows. Not one was saved. They came there to destroy, And did it thoroughly. Like some new joy They toyed with death and made it boisterous vows. They killed the boy first; while he blinked and gaped They shot him by a tree outside the door: The women fled: the men they killed like dogs, The father and the uncle.  The old grandfather in a gown he wore, Who hid all night among a pen of hogs.
Hushed in the smoky haze of summer sunset, When I came home again from far-off places, How many times I saw my western city Dream by her river. Then for an hour the water wore a mantle Of tawny gold and mauve and misted turquoise Under the tall and darkened arches bearing Gray, high-flung bridges. Against the sunset, water-towers and steeples Flickered with fire up the slope to westward, And old warehouses poured their purple shadows Across the levee. High over them the black train swept with thunder, Cleaving the city, leaving far beneath it Wharf-boats moored beside the old side-wheelers Resting in twilight.
The national day had dawned. Everywhere the national tree was opening its blossoms to the sun's first rays, and from all quarters young and old in national costume were making their way to the original National Building, where the national standard already fluttered against the sky. Some breakfasted on the national dish as they walked, frequently pausing to greet acquaintances with a heartfelt exchange of the national gesture. Many were leading the national animal; others carried it in their arms. The national bird flew overhead; and on every side could be heard the keen strains or the national anthem, played on the national instrument. Where enough were gathered together, national feeling ran high, and concerted cries of &lsquo;Death to the national foe!&rsquo; were raised. The national weapon was brandished. Though festivities were constrained by the size of the national debt, the national sport was vigorously played all day and the national drink drunk. And from midday till late in the evening there arose continually from the rear of the national prison the sounds of the national method of execution, dealing out rapid justice to those who had given way  on this day of all days  to the national vice.
Virginius, the Roman Father,  With beating heart, though brave, Beheld his fair Virginia doomed,  To be a tyrant's slave. Despair had gather'd on his brow,  Commingled with regret; A gleam of hope ran through his soul,  I may redeem her yet. Come hither, belov'd Virginia,  Ere we forever part; He clasp'd her to his beating breast,  Then stab'd her to the heart. Thus, did a Roman Father slay,  The idol of his soul, To screen her from a tyrant's lust,  A tyrant's foul control. Though this was done in days of yore,  The act was truly brave; What value, pray, is life to man,  If that man be a slave? Go and ask of Margaret Garner,  Who's now in prison bound, (No braver woman e'er hath trod,  Columbia's slave-cursed ground:) Why did she with a mother's hand  Deprive her child of breath? She'll tell you, with a Roman's smile,  That slavery's worse than death. O! that every bondman now,  Through all that slave-cursed land, Had each a heart like Margaret's,  Their freedom to demand. Then the Jubilee year would come;  On spire and dome you'd see Inscribed in blazing characters,  That all mankind are free. Long live the name of Margaret,  In every freeman's breast; And when her days are numbered here,  May she in heaven be blest!
Death has a cock that is always erect. It writes on the wind. It writes in beautiful longhand: Spread your legs tonight, Martha. By the light of their thighs I'll come to you. Unbutton your dress Miss Hannum And bare your old maid's breasts. Tonight I'll spill my sperm, my rosary of worms on their nipples. And you little girl, I'll wear a hair from your maidenhead Among the grey bristles inside my left ear. Those made pregnant by death Have the scars of its love-making wound in black. Their friends shuffle behind carrying wreaths. They are drunk like wedding guests. Death's children Resemble you and me, They go coughing, yes sir, they sit In furnished rooms When the lights are low Adding up angels on a pinpoint, Only to pass the time, And the time passes.
The gaunt thing with no organs creeps along the streets of Europe, she will commute, in her feathered bat stomach-grown with no organs with sores on her insides even her head a vast puschamber of pus(sy) memories with no organs nothing to make babies She will be the great witch of euro-american legend who sucked the life from some unknown nigger whose name will be known but whose substance will not ever not even by him who is dead in a pile of dopeskin This bitch killed a friend of mine named Bob Thompson a black painter, a giant, once, she reduced to a pitiful imitation faggot full of American holes and a monkey on his back slapped airplanes from the empire state building May this bitch and her sisters, all of them, receive my words in all their orifices like lye mixed with cococola and alaga syrup feel this shit, feel it, now laugh your hysterectic laughs while your flesh burns and your eyes peel to red mud
On Piccadilly you can't get away with it  bending for a piece of string spotted from six brisk paces away; picking it up as carefully as the tipsy man a dropped halfpenny; stretching it right out at arm's length to test the width. Then over and over the cupped left hand, winding it home. Get away with it he did and in great style: all of us on the pavement felt our own desires to pick up string begin to quicken. He had set something rolling: he could have led us as willing followers in any campaign for saving string  whatever he liked. Throughout he would be nothing without this passion as we would be nothing. He trod the ground at Piccadilly like a carpet of camomile, that was the secret and he swung his stick squat and polished resting the brass tip every other step as if pointing out one particular lepidoptera lying perfectly disguised among the camomile leaves. Old fashioned rhetoric of Children Hills and gentlemen's clubs which allows protected characters to potter in safety and wind string, a brew of order and avarice which says I have this and this but never enough string.
<>  Oh I'm a British bo oy, Sir,  A joy to o tell it you.  God make me of it worthy  Life's toilsome journey through!  And when to man's estate I grow  My British blood the world shall know,  For I'm a British bo oy, Sir,  A joy to o tell it you!  And so to man's estate he grew and his British blood the world it knew. And the world it didn't give a hoot if his blood was British or Timbuctoot. But with that British blood of his he painted some pictures, real beauties <> to Britain, where his blood came from. But Britannia turned pale, and began to faint.  Destroy, she moaned, these horrors in paint!  He answered: Dear Britannia, why? I'm your British boy, and I did but try ! If my pictures are nude, so once were you, and you will be again, therefore why look blue!  Britannia hid behind her shield lest her heel of Achilles should be revealed, and she said: Don't dare, you wretch, to be lewd! I never was nor will be nude!  And she jabbed her British trident clean through the poor boy's pictures: You see what I mean!  But the British boy he turned and fled for the trident was levelled at his head. Henceforth he'll keep clear of her toasting-fork. Pleasing Britannia is no light work.
I don't know if there's such a thing as the new york sonnet, and I can't find out until I get my copy of Denby back from a guy who shot through to Carnarvon at short notice. It's not likely that tracking stations, bananas, racism, and the Gascoyne River are going to yield a response, but Denby, to whom you handed a cup of tears some years ago in a film that was rumoured to be a sonnet in itself, holds the answer, not so much in the dance of language, but in his collecting insulators from the tops of power pylons and giving them as tokens of gratitude to his closest friends.
A long way back I look and find myself as I was then I am,a circling man in a seizure of talk that he hears too as he goes on. The silence of the room was empty and I cried aloud. At ten o'clock, went out and walkt the empty streets again, came into the crowded bar for company and talkt of leaving when the rains began. Some listend and some tired of me. I do not know if I am bound to run upon this wheel, wound up, excited in a manic spiel of wheel in wheel, or if I'm free to talk wherever they are free to listen.A long way back I look, and I was often disheartand there where I was. Returning found the room deserted, an empty space of Asia that crept into me. I tried to die and did not.The hurt was an empty place in meaning I turnd from. That God was Asia I tried to say.Some, were tired of it and left, but there was too much that I had left to say. I heard the drone of wonders as I went on, a monotony of windings in the sun that led away into a waiting in a room that Time itself be done. What did I have to say?The talk was of Asia and an emptiness in God that man have known in deserts and in times like we are in. What was I come to?As I come to, your eyes have left me, and they stray to find some exit from where we are. &ldquo; I strive to get across.You gather up your things apart from me. You do not follow, and I am lost therein. There is in me a weary stretch I mean to say some urgency that draws the matter out I cannot come to,and I want company. A long way back I look and find I am still here.I hear the scraping of a chair, excuses mutterd as they go. The place is closing and I am alone I fear. It's twelve to two. I have come to myself.Good Night. I will not need your help me Lord.From here Great Asia beyond the horizon of my sight goes on to nowhere I cannot say and in that continent as I go the hour stretches year on year.
My soul and I went walking  Beneath the moon of spring; The lilies pale were talking,  We heard them murmuring. From dimly moonlit places  They thrust long throats of white, And lifted fairy faces  Of fragrant snow and light. Their language was an essence,  Yet clear as any bird's; And from it grew a presence,  As music grows from words. A spirit born of silence  And chastity and dew Among Elysian islands  Were not more white to view. A spirit born of fire  And holiness and snow, Within the Heaven's desire,  Were not more pure to know. He smiled among them, lifting  Pale hands of prayer and peace  And through the moonlight, drifting,  Came words to me like these:  &ldquo;We are His lilies, lilies,  Whose praises here we sing! We are the lilies, lilies  Of Christ our Lord and King!&rdquo;
Almost unskied half the moon Gyring errant night unearther of eyes let's see how many stars are shredded in the pool Causes a cross to mourn between my eyes Forge of blue metals nights of silent strife my heart whirls like a mad wheel Girl come from so far sometimes lightens your glance under the sky Thunderer tempest twister fury above my heart she cuts across not halting Wind from the tombs whirls off tears up disperses your drowsy root Uprooted the great trees on the other side of her But you You were what the wind was shaping with leaves in light Behind the heights of night white lily a blaze Ah Want that slashed my breast to pieces it is time to follow another path when she does not smile Storm burier of bells troubled tumult of torment why touch her now why afflict her Alas where neither anguish nor death nor winter interrupt with their open eyes through the dew
O lovely chance, what can I do To give my gratefulness to you? You rise between myself and me With a wise persistency; I would have broken body and soul, But by your grace, still I am whole. Many a thing you did to save me, Many a holy gift you gave me, Music and friends and happy love More than my dearest dreaming of; And now in this wide twilight hour With earth and heaven a dark, blue flower, In a humble mood I bless Your wisdom and your waywardness. You brought me even here, where I Live on a hill against the sky And look on mountains and the sea And a thin white moon in the pepper tree.
Purest of breed of all the tribes That trekked from time and took the Trail of Tears There to the plain beyond the bribes Of best advantage, past the rifle's reach, Where instinct rests and action disappears And the skulls of cattle bleach. High in the plateaus of their soul The silence is reshaped like rocks by wind, Their eyes are beads that pay their toll, Record the race-long heritage of grief, At altitudes where memory is thinned, Frown like a wrinkled chief. The painted feather still upright They walk in concrete Tulsa dark and mute, Their bravest blankets slashing bright The afternoon of progress and of wives; Their children glow like some primordial fruit Cut from the branch by knives. Bark-smooth as spears and arrow-straight They watch the world like winter trees and grow; Forests of them revive and wait, In timeless hibernation dream and stir. These are the lives that love the soundless snow And wear the wind like fur. Because their pride of nation leaps, The august rivers where they yelled and died Move with a blood that never sleeps. Because their nature suffers the arrest Of seed, their silence crowds us like a tide And moves their mournful quest.
Small and awkward under his robe he feels the pins dig through and wonders why Christmas has to find him out, perched shaking on a platform. His mother's hands shift his wings. He wants to give her more than words. The other children spin and flutter, more like moths than angels. Stars on strings dangle in Mary's window. Sister Justina prods him up the ladder. His mother is a small, white face before the blank faces of the audience and the dark rows of seats. His message from God is the birth of Jesus. Pleased with the lines, unsure of their force, he repeats them. Pins and words hold up the house.
Zones of flickering water-diamonds converse with almost-still glint of leaves along the poplar-row. A dispersed array of water-birds relaxes afloat in autumn light, one or another sometimes diving casually. And far across near the other shore, the lake is wearing a narrow, trembling band of silver, a silver barely tinged with gold, delicate tarnish. Someone's tapedeck booms and yells crescendo ... pulses by and zooms out of the park. And quiet resumes, holding off as best it can peripheral sounds of human action  planes, subliminal traffic, (only one motorboat yet, it's a workday morning)  but admits the long and distant old-time wail of a train: this quiet, this autumn sun, cool air and pale diaphanous light, are generous.
Then there was Johann, The carousel horse  except he wasn't really a carousel horse. He grew up &ldquo;in the naive realism of the Wolffian school, which without close scrutiny regarded logical necessity and reality as identical.&rdquo; On Sundays, they took him to the undertaker's for sugar. All these people flying in their dreams, he remarked. He stood before the Great Dark Night of History, a picture of innocence held together by his mother's safety pins  lissome, frisky. Cool reflection soon showed there were openings among the signatories of death certificates ... Plus those fine high leather boots that squeak ... On his exam he wrote: The act of torture consists of various strategies meant to increase the imagination of the  And then ... the Viennese waltz.
Nor time nor all his minions Of sorrow and of pain, Shall dash with vulture pinions The cup she fills again Within the dream-dominions Of life where she doth reign. Clothed on with bright desire And hope that makes her strong, With limbs of frost and fire, She sits above all wrong, Her heart a living lyre, And love its only song. And in the waking pauses Of weariness and care, And when the dark hour draws his Black dagger of despair, Above effects and causes I hear her music there. The longings life hath near it Of beauty we would see; The dreams it doth inherit Of immortality; Are callings of her spirit To something yet to be.
He was a spider inside a tumbler, a miserable gannet caught by wire. Light flooded the galleries and men glowed transparent against the high windows.  Outside his window women played tennis. In a warder's house women took tea. Always the trains slipped slyly into Clapham Junction, and aeroplanes crawled across his window. He woke in sunshine, fell asleep in sunshine. The smell of his armpits suffused him with longing. He read Job and the Song of Solomon. &lsquo;Peau de Chagrin&rsquo; and &lsquo;Venus and Adonis&rsquo;. He had forgotten moon and stars And remembered her only to hate her. Life had ebbed from him, his past was forgotten. It was a story read in a book. There was an afternoon of speechless anguish. He made noises like a hurt dog. Wanted to cry but could not; He could not contain himself: strode the cell feverishly. His heart was bursting and his throat too big for it. Looked out of the window trying to sob. Saw mock him the tall towers of the Lots Road Station. And Eveline who lived under them, would be going to the Caf&eacute;. The sky darkened: a strong wind blew: fanned the smouldering dung heap. It burst into flame, flared and flapped proudly: he thought of himself, and his bitterness faded.
Of course, we would wish them angelic lookouts on vigil to transmit brightening and moving  the glory still forthcoming, still pending ... alert geniuses of anticipation ... in the pure moment prior to speech.... Sadly, it's the dead themselves they resemble, no longer fussing to be served better and more, withdrawing their demands on our attention, and are humble suddenly and patient, keep to their places, and make themselves smaller to give death greater room, and hunch down farther. It hurts to see them so decent and poor. And it does no good to scold them for it, to shout at these newly impoverished relations crowding timidly in the narrow hallway, or recall to them the old extravagance, or tempt them back with favorite morsels and the glowing tales that made the hearth warmer. Not once more will they rise from the table or come laughing out of the vestibule, kicking the springtime's mud from their shoes. The little and the less consume them now. What a fever it is, to make do with nothing. And throw off every word they ever wore, the metaphors that made them legendary  as if anything not literal bone, not plain matter, was illusion, delirium, conceit, swollenness of spirit prancing on show, this corruption ailing in their ligaments now. They are dying to be the letter itself: immaculate, and perfect in form, minute, not ever again to be read into, and beyond whiteness white, sole, invisible.
I am looking for the places that were there before the sand. What is strange about this country, sphinxes and pyramids on a duny plain, is what emerges from the hidden. Once they looked ordinary in their real setting, not desert, but a green, a populated world, and now covered by sand its peaks are hints we try to make sense of, imagining we long for it. We long for something all right and dream of finding a sand map to lead us there hoping that under the desert is where it is. If not that, what are we longing for? What lost world? But what if it is for something new, not old, the not-yet-born? And even with a sand map, an accurate one, say you follow it, trustingly, and discover that buried world with its glories, and horrors, then what do you have? Even knowing what was there, following a program of limited excavation won't bring it back, won't make sands that cover it blow away, make those figures on friezes come to life, and the cataclysmic scenes replay. For after you have found it, after all that searching and working, you'll have to look at your life and see that nothing has changed  so, having dealt with the past as best you could you might declare it is better to know than not to know, but having used up the best of your strength, weary now, you must live with what you are, and even if it is desert, where you are, making the best of it.
Sunlight weaves in the corn, honeylight meshes the honeystalks, lacing the stems with light till the net is tight and swings in the golden wind. Sunlight weaves in your hair, sheaving its fiery petals into your cooler showers, its hot-gold in their cold-gold, its hot flowers in their shade. Sunlight weaves in your eyes, loosening its leaves and shaking them, allowing its spears to be broken by a hundred mirrors and errors; threshing their pools to ripples; drowned and found and drowned.
A refugee from contention I load stills into the projector taking the negative impression adjuncting expression prising anger out of its folds the damage budding retentive small experiment releasing heat: remember looting these impressions? machinery expressive and light  conscious love scarifying poise the tractor rocketing the clods of loamy earth bootlegging frustration mudbrick and fencewire circular-saws threatening Robert Frosts and doorpost jamming two years too old and rotting, the sun orange plastic, perfect, the film was black and white and the sheep gurgling hysterically.
Her dress was too tight, she had fits &amp; starts of violent memory that threw daily memories down the airshaft, she looked into the cupboard and found a bone that changed into a shadow that stole some treasure from its hiding place behind the clock, she could not follow, her dress clutched her, but there were days when shreds of light, fringes of sun caught her up &amp; whizzed away with her along serene trolley lines, she reached for anything &amp; could keep whatever she could touch, she made: a collage of torn leaves she had touched, a glass moon-reflector, often she almost spoke, sharp stars got tangled in her hair, dazzled by the quietly shining tracks she wondered if they had passed the place of arrival?
With the time lapse, the upturned echidna writhes,  ants and maggots consuming its sponge-like  flesh beneath the spreading International Klein Blue sky  just a component part of an heroic  the residue of its life flashing by, as sun-eaten locals  stare uncomprehendingly at the skins of their finest sheep strung out over rusty fences, all veined  and varicosed with ordnance despite  tableaux of monochromatic sameness, as if each were a small centre, a source of density  the sky, the dam water, the raddled paddocks and graded roads,  those soft diggings around fallen trees multiplying each night, writ in mystical latin:   Beneath the picture subterranean streams overflow,  underwriting patches of poison bush that'd see the whole flock stone dead on the spread, blue as blue Venus in a deeply blue light, blue as the International Klein Blue sea  beside which the locals spend their holidays.
Do the prairie flowers, the huge autumn Moons, return in season? Debs, Berkman, Larkin, Haywood, they are dead now. All the girls are middle aged. So much has escaped me, so much lies covert In memory, and muffled Like thunder muttering through sleep, that woke me, To watch the city wink Out in the violet light under the twisting rain. Lightning storms are rare here, In this statistically perfect climate. The eucalyptus shed Branches, doors banged, glass broke, the sea smashed its walls. I, in my narrow bed, Thought of other times, the hope filled post war years, Exultant, dishevelled Festivals, exultant eyes, dishevelled lips, Eyes dulled now, and lips thinned, Festivals that have betrayed their occasions. I think of you in  The heroine on the eve of explosion; Or angry, white, and still, Arguing with me about Sasha's tragic book. Here in the empty night, I light the lamp and hunt for pad and pencil. A million sleepers turn, While bombs fall in their dreams. The storm goes away, Muttering in the hills. The veering wind brings the cold, organic smell Of the flowing ocean.
Because she had ceased to cry, and her eyes had turned the color of okra, I took her pock-boned jaws, and kissed her lids. Like a mussel clamped into darkness her eyes two matchsticks in a waterbowl, soggy with blackness, there is no love in those eyes, only loss, pregnant with intelligent shame.
Where now hangs the saddlebag of pointless zeal for Yen Hui, where lies the road to dark Wei and its dictator? Where has it blown, the sandtrack to dissipated Emirs for barefoot Francis, where the fire that englobed him? Where are they, the left hands of Mucius Scaevola, charred, and of Colonel von Stauffenberg, mangled but willing? Where scrapes the trench shovel of Musonius Rufus, where rock the lever and treadle of Simone Weil's drill press? Where is it shelved, the parchment of first entitlement, and where has he gone, the man who recognized it, reading its  blanks? &lsquo;Then who is it standing before me!&rsquo; bawled the emperor. &lsquo;I cannot tell you!&rsquo; barked the wayfarer, and walked off. Into grey mosses bearding a blue cliff. Into the blessing before battle, in the mass sung raggedly  afterwards. Curs&egrave;d be he / they / we! This too shall pass, but not adroitly. In the psalms of the man pulled from flood by a stag, and  therefore in the emperor's lust for the stag, that his horns be turned into  wine cups, in the saved one's betrayal of the deer to the throne-holder, in the eavesdropping swallow's flight, for he told all in time,  and in the stag's rebuke to the emperor, for this in turn made the wretch confess to his ruler, who demanded: &ldquo;Shudderer, stutterer, where is the golden one who spoke here, where has he gone, who gave you your useless redemption?&rsquo; Into the air past your portals, O great one, not the air but the earth stretching away, magnificence, not the wide but the red earth, high one, reddened to cochineal by petals of the mango, eminence, where they have fallen, majesty, and blooded our ground, there one may pursue him, the foregoer, the horned knower.
Winter, wither, A greentime, a leaftime farther than any star; The old year gnawed away, and this new month narrow Huddling indoors with a crust of warmth Cold enfolded, the city pavement old, The stars stone-laden in a weighted sky. Now spring a sudden hallelujah! Behold, your birthday and the season uprising, A leaven of gold. <> As needy delight; Morning air midnight entire And now the freshest joy Our sonour seed Making the winter blaze The stars at hand And green leaves everynear.
I have been so innerly proud, and so long alone, Do not leave me, or I shall break. Do not leave me. What should I do if you were gone again So soon? What should I look for? Where should I go? What should I be, I myself, &ldquo;I&rdquo;? What would it mean, this I? Do not leave me. What should I think of death? If I died, it would not be you: It would be simply the same Lack of you. The same want, life or death, Unfulfilment, The same insanity of space, You not there for me. Think, I daren't die For fear of the lack in death. And I daren't live. Unless there were a morphine or a drug. I would bear the pain. But always, strong, unremitting It would make me not me. The thing with my body that would go on living Would not be me. Neither life nor death could help. Think, I couldn't look towards death Nor towards the future: Only not look. Only myself Stand still and bind and blind myself. God, that I have no choice! That my own fulfilment is up against me Timelessly! The burden of self-accomplishment! The charge of fulfilment! And God, that she is    Do not leave me.
Rain over a continent, the train From Washington to Washington plunged In the sowing rain. He slept with His nurse on the voyage, she was rough, Scarred with transcontinental love, She was his all-guessing heart when he died. <> The rain the continent wheeled, his own land Electric and blind, farmlights and cities' Blazes points, clusters and chains  Each light a memory and the whole of darkness Memory. In the seedfall of a continent The majesty of a man rendered himself home: His death was dust on the land when he died.
The fat-bottom boats bob and roll where the grain of the current planes the keel. Sometimes they appear hand in hand; pair-trawling where the surface is warm and the sea calm. Sometimes they are almost stopped. The sonar arm can pick the shoal up as an entity, then between the boats the net falls open like a mouth and at its lips the bright pelagic fish acquiesce. Unless the cool &lsquo;El Nino&rsquo; gusts westerly. That breaks the light and then the catch becomes a poor resemblance of a likeness of a shadow of itself. That sinks Peru like in sixty-five, and seventy-one. Today, two empty boats are drifting home across the hollow fields of fished-out sea. The washed out crew are puzzled by the ice-house; less than half full and even the cormorants can't come up with anything. Hard times for the hake and pilchard, next on the U.S. shopping list. Hard times for the Peruvian guano diggers, no fish: no birds: no shit.
i thank You God for most this amazing day:for the leaping greenly spirits of trees and a blue true dream of sky;and for everything which is natural which is infinite which is yes (i who have died am alive again today, and this is the sun's birthday;this is the birth day of life and of love and wings:and of the gay great happening illimitably earth) how should tasting touching hearing seeing breathing any lifted from the no of all nothing human merely being doubt unimaginable You? (now the ears of my ears awake and now the eyes of my eyes are opened)
She sat on the toilet seat, legs spread, and I helped by pouring warm water over her cunt, bloody as if it had been torn in childbirth, perhaps, each of us ripping it open as we battered our way out with our heads, or by the abortionist's instruments a dozen times, she said, not to mention Daddy, a mean fucker, if I know him, right through blood and gore. It was eternally bleeding I know, because wasn't I always being sent to the store for the jumbo-size box of Kotex, for which one wiseguy on the block named me Ko-Ed? Yet, one of the wonders of nature is that it seems endlessly repairable  ripped open, it heals, and heals again. And women like cats screaming as the barbed penis rips into them, banging away, while the Tom pants: &ldquo;Oh Jewboy, that feels good.&rdquo; Is there any wonder I look at it as a disaster area? At the breast I was a biter, which meant, &ldquo;Give, damn you,&rdquo; and my fair-haired mother cursed back at the black little bastard tearing at her breast. This stomachache I've had all my life, it says: Her cunt, her bloody cunt. Yes, that will be my all-purpose curse for headache, backache, humiliation, and failure: Her bloody cunt, my mother's bloody cunt.
Master, still the tempest  On life's troubled sea, Lest the raging billows  Shall overwhelm me. I, a storm-tossed mariner,  No safe port can find, From the wild waves beating,  And the howling wind. Master, still the tempest,  Hear my earnest cry, Fierce the storm clouds gather,  And o'erspreads the sky. Lest thou still the tempest,  Wrecked my bark shall be, Master, still the tempest,  Quiet it, Lord, for me.
When Mercury and Love and Death and even the grand horse of Physical Energy have all, by Mr. Watts and the Victorians, been carefully emasculated  so that all our Daddies were quite British &ldquo;pure&rdquo;, they never did anything  all dear Daddy-do-nothings! Hypocrites and eunuchs, eunuchs and hypocrites! What are we, O what are we immaculately conceived Daddyless children of Daddy-do-nothing? <> <>
Prepare the frame, summon the picture to appear therein, this straightedge road to surround a linear experience. Inside, right here, where the bed frame is set up the bed, boxspring, mattress, headboard, set up a throb. A wail. A yearning sob. A whirl or whale careened (turned over to show its keel in day's air) on the strand, show bottom on the beach, keel over hemline, the road goes straight. So remarkably. So surely the thin sunlight so cold and later the vast moon over Carle Place, craters &amp; banners, hazes, rabbit, old man with faggots on his back, La Luna, chaste in the heavy snow-threatened air. Safely inland by that time, almost home, the light, the moon, oh the air forgives the moon I said, meaning I forgive you for being beautiful.
If ever against this easy blue and silver Hazed-over countryside of thoughtfulness, Far behind in the mind and above, Boots from before and below approach trampling, Watch how their premonition will display A forward countryside, low in the distance  A picture-postcard square of June grass; Will warm a summer season, trim the hedges, Cast the river about on either flank, Start the late cuckoo emptily calling, Invent a rambling tale of moles and voles, Furnish a path with stiles. Watch how the field will broaden, the feet nearing, Sprout with great dandelions and buttercups, Widen and heighten. The blue and silver Fogs at the border of this all-grass. Interruption looms gigantified, Lurches against, treads thundering through, Blots the landscape, scatters all, Roars and rumbles like a dark tunnel, Is gone.   The picture-postcard grass and trees Swim back to central: it is a large patch, It is a modest, failing patch of green, The postage-stamp of its departure, Clouded with blue and silver, closing in now To a plain countryside of less and less, Unpeopled and unfeatured blue and silver, Before, behind, above.
For my heart suffices your breast for your freedom suffice my wings From my mouth will soar to the sky what was sleeping above your soul Exists in you the illusion of each day You come like dew to flower crowns With your absence you undermine the horizon Forever in flight like the wave I have said like pines like masts Like them you are tall and moody and sadden suddenly like a journey You draw things towards you like an ancient path Echoes people you and pining voices I awake and at times there migrated there fled birds that were sleeping in your soul
Pretty glow on the water Christ she's sweet as a little cotton angel Church bells sending silver pups over the field <> <> What I want to know is with people putting lights on In houses across the river and that funny wonderful Smell to her hair and the red and golden leaves Dancing up into the soft dark pocket <> <> (What do you think of world conditions? they ask me  World conditions, is it! And oh for the love of God They're absolutely word deleted, I tell them And the price of shovels going up every day) The beautiful soft glow on the water The touch of her body against me O it always comes in the cry of the poor bastards caught in the wheel
&ldquo;Love seeketh not regard. Love is its own reward.&rdquo; So I console myself When your coldness overwhelms. Yet I'd like some sign, If only just a smile, For you to touch my hand, Or just to brush my arm, And, if you deigned to kiss, Would I not die of bliss? They say that starving men Shrink their stomachs, then, When they have food at last, They can not bear the taste, But vomit out as vile What they pined for one while. Thus it may be when you've Learned at last to love: For, starved too long, my mood May spurn unwonted food.
<> The hawthorn blossoms spider-spun, The dew-damp daisies in the grass Laugh up to greet me as I pass To meet the upland sun. It is that I would fainer be The little page, on bended knee, Who stoops to gather up her train Beneath the porch-lamp's ruby rain Than hold a realm in fee. It is that in her scornful eye, Too hid for courtly sneer to spy, I saw, one day, a look which said That I, and only I, might shed Love-light across her sky. I know a secret, such a one The hawthorn blossoms spider-spun, The dew-damp daisies in the grass Laugh up to greet me as I pass To meet the upland sun.
They come out in warm weather like termites crawling out of the woodwork. The young mothers chauffeuring these bright bundles in toy carriages. Bundles shaped like pumpkin seeds. All last winter, the world was grown up, gray figures hurrying along as lean as umbrellas; empty of infants, though I heard them at night whimpering through a succession of rooms and walls; felt the tired, awakened hand grope out from the dark to clamp over the cries. For a while, even the animals vanished, the cats stayed close to the kitchens. Their pincushion paws left padded tracks around the perimeters of houses locked in heat. Yet, there were hints of children hiding somewhere, threatening to break loose. Displaced tricycles and pubescent dolls with flaxen hair and limbs askew were abandoned dangerously on sidewalks. The difficult walk of pregnant mothers. Basketfuls of plastic eggs nestled in cellophane grass appeared one day at the grocer's above the lettuce and the carrot bins. When the first crocuses pushed their purple tongues through the skin of the earth, it was the striking of a match. The grass lit up, quickly, spreading the fire. The flowers yelled out yellow, red, and green. All the clanging colors of crayolas lined like candles in a box. Then the babies stormed the streets, sailing by in their runaway carriages, having yanked the wind out from under their mothers. Diapers drooped on laundry lines. The petals of their tiny lungs burgeoning with reinvented air.
We moved south where the streets turn, Northeast, southwest: the house half faces sunrise. In the hush of the night we lying abed feel those great mysterious currents That run up the world, out of Mexico and the jungles south, Out of the southern slopes and all that bulk and strength of the lower seas, Pouring north through the night, Hit the house counter, the beams strain, The house like a ship taking seas on her bow Moves in the dark, the nailed and hammered wood whines on its posts. Rising at night see Sagittarius lifting you think due east, the wrong quarter. Baffled by street plan turn back to the bed. In the charged and quivering air of that room, When the thick night coils on the walls and your blood deadens, Listen: the house trembles, The old wood shifts on its posts.
Maybe I oughtn't to be naming names. Maybe Sister Jean Therese is still alive, married to a former priest or nine to five with one of those human-service agencies. Maybe Bobby Bacon lives on fruits and cheese or joined some eastern cult of vegetables. Maybe Jimmy Shryock works the vice patrol or has a TV ministry. Who knows? I know Father Kenny retired to Salthill and died of eighty years. As for the rest, maybe I should have used an alias. Maybe what I should have said was  though tits is what they seemed and ever shall seem world without end.
<> To Canada and Mexico. Be still, be still. What would you see? People. But wherefore go To Canada and Mexico? People are mysteries to me. There are they less mysterious? Here, I dare not; but there I guess ... You'll never  But I desire to peek and peer At people not disguised by  Perhaps I know too much to see All that I should. I want them clear. You want them quaint. That won't do. Stay home until your eyes are sure. Travel is never any cure. My itching foot still wants to go To Canada and Mexico. That's an excuse. I think you want To get away from old Vermont. You have a touch of vertigo. What would you see? Places. Why do that? This planet is my habitat. I like the shiver in Labrador. I like the air of North. The mango calls for me to go To pink and yellow Mexico. Such things to travel for! Well go for all of me. I'm setting forth. Popocatepetl smokes And Canada is full of oaks. And the world of fools. After that what will you do? After I have gone, la, la, To Mexico and Canada, Gone and come again, I want To lay me down in old Vermont. To die? To die. But first to go To Canada and Mexico. Why? Goodbye!
He turned back here. Anyone would. After The long romantic journey from the North To be faced with this. A  A place that, like a mirror, makes you see. A scrubby ridge, impassive river, and beyond, The flats of Middle England. History waited To absorb him. Parliaments, dynasties, empires Lay beyond these turnip fields. Not what he wanted. He could have done it. The German Royals Had packed their bags, there was a run On the Bank of England, London stood open as jelly. Nobody could have stopped him. This place did, And the hurricane that blew his cause from Moidart In a bluster of kilts and claymores and bright red hair Faded at Swarkestone as they turned their backs, Withdrawing into battle, slaughter, song.
I have a theory about motion. I have a theory about the air. I have a theory about main arteries and bass lines. I have a theory about Friday night, Just a theory, mind you, About a dry mouth and certain kinds of thirst And a once-a-month bulge of money in a working pair of pants. I have a theory about kisses, The way a woman draws a man across a dance floor Like a ship approaching a new world. I have a theory about space And what's between the space And an idea about words, A theory about balance and the alphabet, A theory concerning electricity and the tendons, A hunch about long glances from across a ballroom Even though there's a man on her arm, Even though there's a woman on his arm And Fire and the Ocean, Stars and Earthquakes, Explosions as sharp as new clothes off the rack. When I leap, Brushes strike the lip of a cymbal. When I leap, A note cuts through glass. When I leap, A thick finger dreams on a bass string And all that sweat, All that spittle, All those cigarettes and cheap liquor, All that lighthearted sass and volcanism, All that volatile lipstick, All that Cleaves the air the way a man and woman Sweet-talk in a bed. When I leap, I briefly see the world as it is And as it should be And the street where I grew up, The saxophones, Kisses And mysteries among the houses And my sister, dressing in front of her mirror, A secret weapon of sound and motion, A missionary In the war against The obvious.
Our Bog is dood, our Bog is dood, They lisped in accents mild, But when I asked them to explain They grew a little wild. How do you know your Bog is dood My darling little child? We know because we wish it so That is enough, they cried, And straight within each infant eye Stood up the flame of pride, And if you do not think it so You shall be crucified. Then tell me, darling little ones, What's dood, suppose Bog is? Just what we think, the answer came, Just what we think it is. They bowed their heads. Our Bog is ours And we are wholly his. But when they raised them up again They had forgotten me Each one upon each other glared In pride and misery For what was dood, and what their Bog They never could agree. Oh sweet it was to leave them then, And sweeter not to see, And sweetest of all to walk alone Beside the encroaching sea, The sea that soon should drown them all, That never yet drowned me.
Any way you hold them, they hurt. What's the use, then? Once in our backyard, by a sparrow's hidden tremor there in the green wish of spruce, a full but unfolded body hung. It bore every color of the world and was sweet beyond measure. The canyon wind banged at this then went elsewhere. Something happened that night. The sparrow seems to have seen what it was. Look at him huddled there, mistakably some other shadow, the sly outlines of his body almost blue as spruce, the sun like a big wall nearby and you stepping through it, big, that big he would almost give up his only wish. Almost. Almost. Almost. Isn't this the way hearts beat in the world, the way pine cones fall in the night until they don't? When you pick them up, as children do, the tiny spot appears in your palm, red as the sun's first blink of love. And that sticking unabidable tar.
One took a powder, one took tea, one stood in the rain near the wedding tree. In grandmother's house there were many lanterns  but not what we would call light maps the red, yellow and flickering red flickering felt like, and &ldquo;the shadows of someones&rdquo; we would say, then extinguish by pardoned sleep, where the white brook invited the image to rest, when rain entered slowly but firmly, like the histories of the wedding guests. A crow steals a silver coin from one unknown, only to drop it by flaw into the brook like a bone. Caws in the birch tree until a shadow arrives, and the late sun drives past all of them with acknowledgment before crossing to the other side of the world.
O everything important in life occurs upon a bed. It's where you cry when you are born and where you lie when dead. You spend a third of your life in bed with sickness, sex and sleeping. You can have a good laugh with your love in bed though it's also used for weeping. In a bed the most fantastic things are hoped for and conceived. It's where you dream, it's where you scheme, and where you are deceived. It's where on earth you come to birth and most of childhood spend. It's where you come and where you don't and where you come to an end.
Something forgotten for twenty years: though my fathers and mothers came from Cordova and Vitepsk and Caernarvon, and though I am a citizen of the United States and less a stranger here than anywhere else, perhaps, I am Essex-born: Cranbrook Wash called me into its dark tunnel, the little streams of Valentines heard my resolves, Roding held my head above water when I thought it was drowning me; in Hainault only a haze of thin trees stood between the red doubledecker buses and the boar-hunt, the spirit of merciful Phillipa glimmered there. Pergo Park knew me, and Clavering, and Havering-atte- Bower, Stanford Rivers lost me in osier beds, Stapleford Abbots sent me safe home on the dark road after Simeon-quiet evensong, Wanstead drew me over and over into its basic poetry, in its serpentine lake I saw bass-viols among the golden dead leaves, through its trees the ghost of a great house. In Ilford High Road I saw the multitudes passing pale under the light of flaring sundown, seven kings in somber starry robes gathered at Seven Kings the place of law where my birth and marriage are recorded and the death of my father. Woodford Wells where an old house was called The Naked Beauty (a white statue forlorn in its garden) saw the meeting and parting of two sisters, (forgotten? and further away the hill before Thaxted? where peace befell us? not once but many times?). All the Ivans dreaming of their villages all the Marias dreaming of their walled cities, picking up fragments of New World slowly, not knowing how to put them together nor how to join image with image, now I know how it was with you, an old map made long before I was born shows ancient rights of way where I walked when I was ten burning with desire for the world's great splendors, a child who traced voyages indelibly all over the atlas, who now in a far country remembers the first river, the first field, bricks and lumber dumped in it ready for building, that new smell, and remembers the walls of the garden, the first light.
the mind is its own beautiful prisoner. Mine looked long at the sticky moon opening in dusk her new wings then decently hanged himself,one afternoon. The last thing he saw was you naked amid unnaked things, your flesh,a succinct wandlike animal, a little strolling with the futile purr of blood;your sex squeaked like a billiard-cue chalking itself,as not to make an error, with twists spontaneously methodical. He suddenly tasted worms windows and roses he laughed,and closed his eyes as a girl closes her left hand upon a mirror.
Je te vois voltigeante dans la nuit et je te poursuis pour t'at- trapertu es presqu'insaisissable mais &agrave; la fin je te tiensmais quand j'ouvre la main tu n'es pas l&agrave;tu m'as &eacute;chapp&eacute; de nou- veauqu'est-ce que tu chasses c'est clair que ce n'est pas moije plains la v&eacute;locit&eacute; de tes alternances affectives mais je ne sais pas si je veux te faire changer car si tu &eacute;- tais toujours pr&eacute;visible serais tu rasante comme les autres?
Groan then, groan. For the sun is dead, and all that is in heaven is the pyre of blazing gas. And the moon that went so queenly, shaking her glistening beams is dead too, a dead orb wheeled once a month round the park. And the five others, the travellers they are all dead! In the hearse of night you see their tarnished coffins travelling, travelling still, still travelling to the end, for they are not yet buried. Groan then, groan! Groan then, for even the maiden earth is dead, we run wheels across her corpse. Oh groan groan with mighty groans! But for all that, and all that &ldquo;in the centre of your being, groan not&rdquo;. In the centre of your being groan not, do not groan. For perhaps the greatest of all illusions is this illusion of the death of the undying.
High on the wall that holds Jerusalem I saw one stand under the stars like stone. And when I perish it shall not be known Whether he lived, some strolling son of Shem, Or was some great ghost wearing the diadem Of Solomon or Saladin on a throne: I only know, the features being unshown, I did not dare draw near and look on them. Did ye not guess ... the diadem might be Plaited in stranger style by hands of hate ... But when I looked, the wall was desolate And the grey starlight powdered tower and tree: And vast and vague beyond the Golden Gate Heaved Moab of the mountains like a sea.
<> And slashed the white skin of her right shoulder And a crimson zigzag wrote a finger nail hurry. There was a woman spoke six short words And quit a life that was old to her For a life that was new. There was a woman swore an oath And gave hoarse whisper to a prayer And it was all over. She was a thief and a whore and a kept woman, She was a thing to be used and played with. She wore an ancient scarlet sash. The story is thin and wavering, White as a face in the first apple blossoms, White as a birch in the snow of a winter moon. The story is never told. There are white lips whisper alone. There are red lips whisper alone. In the cool of the old walls, In the white of the old walls, The red song is over.
I am sending you a letter care of the next pair of hands and an oak tree in a red dress we will have our hour the letter will explain I am the one who is all from, halfway between an apple and a husband, or a hurricane on nudist beaches. I will put all my bones in one asking and you will set me a task like those fools in medieval poems anxious for impossible assignments I will do it without argument like a man going out for a quart of milk. There are always exceptions (that is what keeps language alive)  Do I have to explain every loaf of bread?
There is no name for brother Like the name of Jonathan The son of Saul. And so we greet you all: The sons of Roosevelt  The sons of Saul. Four brother Jonathans went out to battle. Let every Yankee poet sing their praise Through all the days  What David sang of Saul And Jonathan, beloved more than all. God grant such sons, begot of our young men, To make each generation glad again. Let sons of Saul be springing up again: Out of the eater, fire and power again. From the lost lion, honey for all men. I hear the sacred Rocky Mountains call, I hear the Mississippi Jordan call: <> <>
All others talked as if talk were a dance. Clodhopper I, with clumsy feet would break the gliding ring. Early I learned to hunch myself close by the door: then when the talk began I'd wipe my mouth and wend unnoticed back to the barn to be with the warm beasts, dumb among body sounds of the simple ones. I'd see by a twist of lit rush the motes of gold moving from shadow to shadow slow in the wake of deep untroubled sighs. The cows munched or stirred or were still. I was at home and lonely, both in good measure. Until the sudden angel affrighted me light effacing my feeble beam, a forest of torches, feathers of flame, sparks upflying: but the cows as before were calm, and nothing was burning, nothing but I, as that hand of fire touched my lips and scorched my tongue and pulled my voice into the ring of the dance.
I saw a proud, mysterious cat, I saw a proud, mysterious cat, Too proud to catch a mouse or rat  Mew, mew, mew. But catnip she would eat, and purr, But catnip, she would eat, and purr. And goldfish she did much prefer  Mew, mew, mew. I saw a cat 'twas but a dream, I saw a cat 'twas but a dream Who scorned the slave that brought her cream  Mew, mew, mew. Unless the slave were dressed in style, Unless the slave were dressed in style, And knelt before her all the while  Mew, mew, mew. Did you ever hear of a thing like that? Did you ever hear of a thing like that? Did you ever hear of a thing like that? Oh, what a proud mysterious cat. Oh, what a proud mysterious cat. Oh, what a proud mysterious cat. Mew ... mew ... mew.
Chiefly I prize this loss of patience, deep In riot-days around us; these swollen Times propel the future forward: tear Alike my friends and turn about my foes. I think not every lesson learned is Full of welcome; weeds in suburban streets; Stalking gangs who fire at sight; and ghosts Marked with print of million moving feet;  You guess the answer, gather courage: Wash your linen on the wires of storm and song Advertising no shadow hope or unemployed regrets take care These withered times prepare no turkish-bath Of comradeship or endless singing in the square: The fight goes on, goes out, goes in  We cannot loiter though legions repeat The final word of the final orator. This time is wrong. The fact is law, not tactical.
When will you come and identify my body? It had better be soon or I might just take it amiss. When will you come and identify my body? Men basically do what they want, and I've only just realised this. It was silly of me to drown in a shallow river, Too small a gesture to impress the boys. It was silly of me to drown in a shallow river. They are either silent, or else they are making their football noise. I would like to be buried with my shampoo and conditioner. Once I was self-obsessed and even clean. I would like to be buried with my shampoo and conditioner. I'm aware that the cricket highlights start at eleven fifteen. I have been deacidified and boxed. You shouldn't have left me. You shouldn't have gone to the bar. I have been deacidified and boxed. You'll find me in pepper and pickle. You'll find me under the car Or creeping up behind you with a trowel. Are you a garlic crusher or a torch? I'm creeping up behind you with a trowel. You would never change. You would never redecorate the porch. It's clear to me from the way you keep escaping (Into halls, through doors) that you will never be ready. It's clear, from me to the way you keep escaping. When, though? When will you come? Will you come and identify my body?
I read this once: how the Comanche, Weak after long fasting, felt a slow Trembling shake the earth the buffalo!  And raced his pony barebacked toward the herd. That morning not a brave in camp could gird Himself with strength to bend the stout bowstem, Yet with bursting arms he twangs his arrow Deep in the bison's heart! Comanches know The Great Spirit, when it possesses them. And now the poet, half a savage bound By the hungers of his tribe, paces his swift Foray across a desolate hunting-ground In hopes to run to earth a fleeting creature And, with the unpremeditated gift Of spirit, seize imagination's meat.
From East unto West from North unto South thou shalt not comprehend where thou art. Swampland, desert, blizzard, tropic breeze shall be as one in thy air-conditioned site. And for all thy humors, yea, weeping or gladsome, of business appointment or tumescent rendezvous, each room shall contain the same: plastic bucket for ice plastic glass in plastic wrap sanitizing tape across the toilet seat  who breaks it releases demons  wall-to-wall carpet cleaned with embalming fluid cola machine in the hall and in the pool embalming fluid and in the coffee in the coffee shop embalming fluid and all is holiday hosting and heralding with you and your family as the supreme guests of the Hawaiian Luau Room of the Dutch Pantry of the Taj Mahal Lounge where you may imbibe fried clams fried ice cream fried apple pie and dance upon your credit card and when the lights go out you and your spouse and your daughter and baby son are transformed into life-size waxen candles and your wicks are illumined and you cast a cheerful glowing flame all through the darkness until by morning you are melted down
Chuang Tzu with his bamboo pole Was fishing in Pu river. The Prince of Chu Sent two vice-chancellors With a formal document: &ldquo;We hereby appoint you Prime Minister.&rdquo; Chuang Tzu held his bamboo pole. Still watching Pu river, He said: &ldquo;I am told there is a sacred tortoise, Offered and canonized Three thousand years ago, Venerated by the prince, Wrapped in silk, In a precious shrine On an altar In the Temple. &ldquo;What do you think: Is it better to give up one's life And leave a sacred shell As an object of cult In a cloud of incense Three thousand years, Or better to live As a plain turtle Dragging its tail in the mud?&rdquo; &ldquo;For the turtle,&rdquo; said the Vice-Chancellor, &ldquo;Better to live And drag its tail in the mud!&rdquo; &ldquo;Go home!&rdquo; said Chuang Tzu. &ldquo;Leave me here To drag my tail in the mud!&rdquo;
Daughters of different mothers may have the same eyes, but not the same look in their eyes, for only stone goes well with water. One has lips so virginal, they seem to be edged with snow, the discoloured whiteness waiting within ourselves. Her teeth are pressed like seeds against one another, all her bones are armour, and anything one says reaches the scroll of her body slowly, her madonna parting, her milk-fed hands. I would prefer to be kissed by other grown-up lips, but her younger sister speaks with the rapid beating of fish breathing out of water. Her face glitters, becoming blurred like blondes in warm countries. She stands as though interrupted in a swift movement, or kissing in flight, her gown a whirlwind of silk flowers open to bursting-point. Any colour lasts a second, three or four minutes at most and can never be repeated. So few words for so many colours. This blue, this blue, an enfeebled red, the child of old parents. Though it is immutable, it has no more lustre than the moon in its first quarter or the wall above the coat-stand. I wish her room were a square bed with the sheets gushing up like a beautiful expanse of water. The mirror doubles distances so the garden is a cascade of paths. How cold the sea must be, to make all faces the same! She lets her arm rest, like the tulip's turn, on the wheat of her voice. She splashes the much-caressed sky till its distress is lighted from the other side. The silk cracks at its blue corners as if her bones were the weight and shape of birds'.
The damp December light Settles like fog on roofs And gable-ends of slate; The wind blows holes in the sky; the rain Shines on the road like tin, And rain-drops hang on the privet, round and white. Behind a freestone wall, Between the houses and the street, In twelve or less square feet Of tarmac and black soil Blooms the purple primula Bright as a lollipop or an aniseed ball. And so a smile will flower, A kiss like a child's laugh, or more Like a friendly terrier's bark, While the town huddles beneath a dark Drizzle of misery, and the wind Flings down sleet from the frozen fells of war.
&ldquo;Dispera <>  Only for poetry a jangling nerve,  Only for life the baser lusts to serve,  Only a fashion where the function stood. Only a shadow stealing span on span  Over the unmeasured whiteness of the soul;  Darkness around the God-established goal  That blazed before the innocence of man. And when the flame of adolescence breaks  On some wild heart the world has overthrown,  He stares as one who waits alone and wakes, Cheated of love and faith, his vision drawn  Haggard and hopeless from his death-bed down  The hard, gray, tacit distances of dawn.
<> And we were strangers for a week or so. I wrote a poem at the time, I know, And you remember? started on a play. That was the only means we had to tell Our bitter beads; a month, and you were scourging My &ldquo;cheap alliteration&rdquo;; I was urging &ldquo;More feeling in the love scene would be well.&rdquo; But this well, this occasion's not the same; The dream is faded now, and verses on it Would do no good of course, I write this sonnet But you will never say &ldquo;The meter's lame.&rdquo; Such night as this can never know a dawn.  I wonder how your prologue's coming on?
Man, the illogical animal. The others go wrong by anachronistic Instinct, for the world changes, or mistaken Observation, but man, his loose moods disjoin; madness is under the skin To the deep bone. He will be covetous Beyond use or cause, and then suddenly spendthrift fling all possession To all the spoilers. He will suffer in patience Until his enemy has him by the throat helpless, and go mad with rage When it least serves. Or he'll murder his love And feast his foe. Oh an amazing animal, by education And instinct: he often destroys himself For no reason at all, and desperately crawls for life when it stinks. And only man will deny known truth. You story-tellers, novelist, poet and playwright, have a free field, There are no fences, man will do anything.
The back end catching up &amp; skewing shockingly across the hitching pin, jagging sideways and cracking the spine of the truck, trailer arse-up &amp; the driver shot through the windscreen over the bullbar, his load of sheep ground into a rough slurry, minced through the grilles, the asphalt a rink filled with a greasy slick of blood on which tailing vehicles slide into the grotesque haute couture of metal and Pure New Wool a pile-up on the Interstate Highway, an epistemological wreckage.
you shall above all things be glad and young. For if you're young,whatever life you wear it will become you;and if you are glad whatever's living will yourself become. Girlboys may nothing more than boygirls need: i can entirely her only love whose any mystery makes every man's flesh put space on;and his mind take off time that you should ever think,may god forbid and(in his mercy)your true lover spare: for that way knowledge lies,the foetal grave called progress,and negation's dead undoom. I'd rather learn from one bird how to sing than teach ten thousand stars how not to dance
They killed him on the gallows tree, They tore his body part from part, His head they took from his neck bone, They burned before his face his heart. They left him neither mound nor grave, They left no tongues to speak him well, They left no stones to mark his house, No stone to mark: no tongue to tell On Gu&aacute;das pole they put his head, Socorro lifted his right hand, San Gil his left hand lifted up, In Charal&aacute; his foot did stand. Socorro, when your sons forget, San Gil, when you forget this man, When you forget him, Charal&aacute;, The stones the stones will cry Gal&aacute;n.
Mother, must I work all day? All the day? Ay, all the day? Must my little hands be torn? And my heart bleed, all forlorn? I am but a child of five, And the street is all alive With the tops and balls and toys,  Pretty tops and balls and toys. Day in, day out, I toil toil! And all that I know is toil; Never laugh as others do, Never cry as others do, Never see the stars at night, Nor the golden glow of sunlight,  And all for but a silver coin,  Just a worthless silver coin. Would that death might come to me! That blessed death might come to me, And lead me to waters cool, Lying in a tranquil pool, Up there where the angels sing, And the ivy tendrils cling To the land of play and song,  Fairy land of play and song.
I have terrible meditations On the cells all water frail bodies Moisting in a quiver; Flares of life that settle Into stone, The hollow quaking of the soft parts Over bone The city of the Gandharvas, not a real city, Only the memory of a city Preserved in seed from beginningless time. a city crowded with books, Thick grass on the streets, a race of dark people Wearing thin sandals, reading all morning in alleys Glazing black pots at night. the royal feast  One man singing Three join the chorus fifty-stringed  red strings in the sound-board black wine raw fish plain soup &ldquo;Herrick thou art too coorse to love&rdquo; Hoarse cry of nighthawk Circling &amp; swooping in the still, bright dawn.
Entered in an event For which he hasn't trained, His body is pushing beyond The limits of the body: That flat, muscular stomach So many sit-ups drew taut (But his sweatsuit is shredded by moths) Swags over his belt in a bulge. And what's going on with his features? They each have a will of their own. They've decided they're not fully grown, They're getting too big for themselves  The nose is thicker, the skin On the chin wants to hang, so hangs down. And the face is creased and padded In a parcel of furrows and folds. Somewhere under addenda Of belly and rump and jowl Strides the crisp youth and slender Who used to run a quick mile As if he were still the same Though what he ran toward became him. He's within hail of the finish, His record is writ in flesh.
At four in the morning With furry tread My good dog climbs Aboard my bed She lays her chin In my open palm Now neither of us Can come to harm In my open hand Her long jaw seems Like a shifting weight As she chews at her dreams From the coolness Of her nose The blessing of Her breathing glows And the bad night Vampires disappear As my wrist is tickled By her ear
Perhaps there is no smallest consolation, No help, no saving grace, no little ease; Only the presence of this pure compassion We lifted up, who fall upon our knees. Nothing we have to give it or implore. It does not speak to us. It has no face, And is itself only an open door  Forever open, that will never close. Here we are measured by our own creation. Against this little anguish, this short breath, Those choirs of glass rise up in an ovation, Ourselves so small, this house so huge with faith. Here we are measured against the perfect love, Transparent glowing walls define and free. The door is open, but we cannot move, Nor be consoled or saved. But only see.
<> The Greeks had their picnics under another name. The Romans wore glad rags and told their neighbors, &ldquo;What of it?&rdquo; The Carlovingians hauling logs on carts, they too Stuck their noses in the air and stuck their thumbs to their noses And tasted life as a symphonic dream of fresh eggs broken over a frying pan left by an uncle who killed men with spears and short swords. Count these reminiscences like money. Drift, and drift on, white ships. Sailing the free sky blue, sailing and changing and sailing, Oh, I remember in the blood of my dreams how they sang before me. Oh, they were men and women who got money for their work, money or love or dreams. Sail on, white chips. Let me have spring dreams. Let me count reminiscences like money; let me count picnics, glad rags and the great bad manners of the Carlovingians breaking fresh eggs in the cop- per pans of their proud uncles.
Rat-tat-tat-tash of shields upon Ida Among pellmell rocks and harum-scarum Ibex and tettix; willy-nilly The infant cried while the tenterhook heaven Cranes through the cracks of its blue enamel To spot the usurper but metal on metal Drowns him and saves him, drowns and saves. Who later, enthroned in his talk-happy heaven, Felt suddenly harassed, a sky-splitting headache With nothing to cause it and out of that nothing Hard-eyed and helmeted vaulted a goddess; A shuttle flew like a clacking fish, A long spear flew, and the journeymen artists Weighed her in stone, wooed her in stone. Or in bronze or chryselephant; hence these muted Miles of parquet, these careful lights, This aquarium of conditioned air, This ne plus ultra. Ultra? But yes, Gentlemen, first on the left beyond these Black-figure vases there lies a red Letter or birth day, another wing.... Where are two grubs: one like a sentry In a tall box, at attention, lagged in his Mummicose death-dress; one much smaller Lagged against life he too has a Mary But never a Martha to tidy the stables, Poor Tom o' Bethlehem, only a Mary, An ox and an ass, a nought and a cross Whose ways will cross, over and over, The centuries unwinding the swaddling Bands and the death-bands; the long thin pupa Always must wait for the small round one, Deaf till the warm voice cure him, but Tom Condemned to another, a haunted, wing, For all his fire poor Tom's a-cold.
The useful and domestic cat Adorning the familial mat, Now at the fall of purple dusk, Suffers a change. He sheds the husk Of civilisation, and returns To his primeval self. He burns With atavistic nomadry, And yearns to be abroad and free; Nor longer loves the household lars, But only seeks the cruel stars ... Now he is in the pallid gleam His fur unsleeks, his features seem To assume a diabolic leer, His eyes expand, he cocks an ear: And all the urbanity of day Turns to an ardent lust for prey ... But when comes dawn, with slaked desire, He sits again before the fire.
Our themes were three: defying dangers, triumph over dangers, respite from danger. And weapons, four: knife and light, blood and the burning maxims: Stain a breast before you foul your pants. Pay twice the price, if you pay at all. Defend father and mother, kith and kind. These others were not warriors: ninnies and nuts, the palsied pencil vendor, mongolians, morons, the dwarf. Strewn about like pumpkins, squash, or stumps grown over with moss, they lay quietly beyond the law, observed no imperative, enacted no command, these children too cruelly punished in the womb to endure a second forfeit. Stultified by darkness of the forty days, they had, as if tumbled from a broken crate or shivered constellation, rolled to a stop in the sun, like damp oranges, like fallen moons. Wherever we went, their grunts admonished us: There is no victory, there is survival. No, there is only recollection. You think you have survived because you can remember when you were at once both swimming and drowning. Even Messiah of dogs and cats will overlook them on his final errands through the streets, and Paradise take place without their spoiled hosannah, they content to remain at any angle whatever in the sun for all eternity.
Unto what end, I ask, unto what end  Is all this effort, this unrest and toil?  Work that avails not? strife and mad turmoil? Ambitions vain that rack our hearts and rend? Did labor but avail! did it defend  The soul from its despair, who would recoil  From sweet endeavor then? work that were oil To still the storms that in the heart contend! But still to see all effort valueless!  To toil in vain year after weary year  At Song! beholding every other Art Considered more than Song's high holiness,   The difficult, the beautiful and dear!   Doth break my heart, ah God! doth break my heart!
There was a woman in Ithaca who cried softly all night in the next room and helpless I fell in love with her under the blanket of snow that settled on all the roofs of the town, filling up every dark depression. Next morning in the motel coffee shop I studied the made-up faces of women. Was it the middle-aged blond who kidded the waitress or the young brunette lifting her cup like a toast? Love, whoever you are, your courage was my companion for many cold towns after the betrayal of Ithaca, and when I order coffee in a strange place, still I say, lifting, this is for you.
Go! my calf-headed drone! O sheep-faced Ana Stekel turning into dove's dung, Ana Black Ana Noir over niagra of bureau lips, rococo of bad taste your brassier window of New York drenched in marijuana rain Bianca dead on the chessboard field Bianca of torn-down elevators Bianca projected from mexican days of the dead in true baroque dream at the house in shape of a monstrance only there on rotten colonial street autos de fe for you, Bianca jet song of blood fires in yr toenails walls of yr great cunt emblazoned in bile! I'm choking to see you Bianca Bianca a vapor at blackfender stockings burning witches hair at obelisk of crayfish mornings mysterious Daughter Scorpiana who nailed the corpse of wood on flesh Scorpiana sculpted in white opium head of Scorpiana circled by entrails Scorpiana flown from wounds of women beaten to death by the Gestapo Ana BlackAna NoirAna StekelBiancaScorpiana ScorpianaBiancaAna NoirAna BlackAna Stekel
Inevitability may not be pleasant but it is the instrument of the truth That is the message time writes on the other side of the glass through which we see darkly in the two dollar toy-Tao of the videotape that great moment in  Batty, expiring, talks about how everything he's seen will die with him  ships on fire off the shoulder of Orion sea-beams glittering before the Tannhauser gates. Memory is like molten gold burning its way through the skin It stops there. There is no transfer Nothing I have seen will be remembered beyond me That merciful cleaning of the windows of creation will be an excellent thing my interests notwithstanding. But then again I've never been near Orion, or the Tannhauser gates, I've only been here.
Everything is swimming in a wonderful wisdom She said everything was swimming in a wonderful wisdom Silly ass What a silly woman Perhaps she is drunk No I think it is mescalin Silly woman What a silly woman Yes perhaps it is mescalin It must be something Her father, they say ... And that funny man William ... Silly ass What a silly woman <>
In the irruptive mode I wear no hat &amp; hate what I see in the rearview mirror except silver balls. When I was all the rage I was in disruptive mode &amp; wore the instructions on my Reeboks to a frazzle between the lines of what everybody read and the high- way stripes painted there. Actually shoes in those days had no names but I was futurist. Mealtimes at Hojo's &amp; Wendy's the plastic tablecloths had squares in them and squares in them and the prices were cheap obsessively and people in those days laughed until their faces became tic-tac-toe boards &amp; few could tell death to shut up. Life was no fucking (pre)text. Menus with everything under one dollar were not unknown. Anyway, only the greatest could write it down. I was among them. Since then, volcanoes were miniaturized, everyone gets to be a little sick. I know everyone who works here, they are not happy. I wear a dunce cap.
Two geese, four ducks along the shore  They are the sight I always look for Crossing the causeway on my way to town. They are exotic geese, each with a crest, The ducks, two mallard and two white. Sometimes the ducks are upside down, Rumps up, beaks nibbling for fodder, Sometimes the geese are preening feather. But always what I hope for most Is when they swim in a single line Floating the tide, always together, Clearly connected in their varied skein  This is the sight I love the best. But whatever they do And wherever they are, In whatever brilliant or gloomy weather, They rinse my eyes on my way to town. What, after all, brings joyful release After long illness, after near despair, Better than four ducks and two geese? So if by chance they are not there I am cross in the empty-of-joy air, And feel deprived and suddenly alone Driving too fast now, cold at the bone.
Lyric night of the lingering Indian summer, Shadowy fields that are scentless but full of singing, Never a bird, but the passionless chant of insects, Ceaseless, insistent. The grasshopper's horn, and far off, high in the maples The wheel of a locust leisurely grinding the silence, Under a moon waning and worn and broken, Tired with summer. Let me remember you, voices of little insects, Weeds in the moonlight, fields that are tangled with asters, Let me remember you, soon will the winter be on us, Snow-hushed and heartless. Over my soul murmur your mute benediction While I gaze, oh fields that rest after harvest, As those who part look long in the eyes they lean to, Lest they forget them.
a maiden offering drink <> she warned <> &amp; I drank. <> <> I begged of it, <> <> <> <> she said <>
As if by saying &ldquo;morning&rdquo; on January 8th the light would be set forward along the megalophonous shore Was there anything else you wanted to know about the body where I belong how the torso is cut off from a waving arm by the yellow space in the background and how the head has been put on wrong or not wrong. Each looked into the water and was frightened by a different thing of his or her own making One was frightened by stripes and the other by a turtle even though I knew it wouldn't bite but would take me for a ride It was the time when the phone always rings to dissolve the mediating scene in which a phone always rings to help us with our counting I say hello to the lateral darkness who answers guardedly in painted fragments. The drop of a hat If the shoe fits. A thin bird flaps before it sits. Who answers noiselessly Hans Memling is watching from my matchbox where the serpent lives This is his nest
The sun has set Behind Black Combe and the lower hills, But northward in the sky the fells Like gilded galleons on a sea of shadow Float sunlit yet. The liquid light Soaks into the dry motes of the air, Bright and moist until the flood of dawn; Shoals of swifts round the market tower Swim with fish-like flight. Six days ago The fells were limed with snow; the starlings on the chimney  pots Shook the falling flakes off their tin feathers. May gives a sample of four seasons' weathers For a week on show.
Juliet sighs. Romeo speaks. Deep shelters are out of most people's reach. The white tin is a simple gadget for pinpointing the size and position of  nuclear bursts. Simply push the needle in, pump the handle, and You haven't seen anything till you've seen the 200 pounds of beautiful Louise Tucked away in the secret, hardened, national seat of government, Or balanced on bicycles while removing 12 shirts. Yet, even when we made love, at a time when most  women are feeling romantic, she would start to   prattle away about The Royal State Trumpeters of the Household Cavalry. Stimulated by these breaks in the nuclear overcast,  the Sunday Times here offers what is probably the   first complete review of our Civil Defence    preparations, A symbol of the virile, aggressive, muscular game which  one associates with a man who has twice broken the   same leg and twice returned to the game. This is the problem: whether to drink Cointreau neat  and slowly savour every warming sip, Or hang from the tops of palm trees by our feet. While we have the bomb it seems ridiculous not to be honest. It works like this: the motor is powered by ordinary torch batteries. The slightly wounded will be sent on their way, the severely wounded left to The Marquis de Ferrara. Fill out the Panic Sheet. Neither the Sunday Times nor its agents accepts any liability for loss or The gruesome electric chair. You see, we are unashamedly devoted to the kind  of quiet courtesy   which gets rarer    every     day.
When I close my eyes, I can see it, That bare hill with the man ploughing, Corrugating that brown roof Under a hard sky. Under him is the farm, Anchored in its grass harbour; And below that the valley Sheltering its few folk, With the school and the inn and the church, The beginning, middle and end Of their slow journey above ground. He is never absent, but like a slave Answers to the mind's bidding, Endlessly ploughing, as though autumn Were the one season he knew. Sometimes he pauses to look down To the grey farmhouse, but no signals Cheer him; there is no applause For his long wrestling with the angel Of no name. I can see his eye That expects nothing, that has the rain's Colourlessness. His hands are broken But not his spirit. He is like bark Weathering on the tree of his kind. He will go on; that much is certain. Beneath him tenancies of the fields Will change; machinery turn All to noise. But on the walls Of the mind's gallery that face With the hills framing it will hang Unglorified, but stern like the soil.
Even at 26, the hush when you unexpectedly walked into a theatre. One year after  Desiring not to cause a fuss, you sit alone in the rear, watching a re hearsal. The actors are impressed. Wel don Johnson, so super at des cription, jots it all down. I dont blame you for disliking Whitman, Paul. He lacked your style, like your highcollared mandalaed portrait in hayden's <> Death, the uncouth critic does a first draft on your breath.
What lively lad most pleasured me Of all that with me lay? I answer that I gave my soul And loved in misery, But had great pleasure with a lad That I loved bodily. Flinging from his arms I laughed To think his passion such He fancied that I gave a soul Did but our bodies touch, And laughed upon his breast to think Beast gave beast as much. I gave what other women gave That stepped out of their clothes, But when this soul, its body off, Naked to naked goes, He it has found shall find therein What none other knows, And give his own and take his own And rule in his own right; And though it loved in misery Close and cling so tight, There's not a bird of day that dare Extinguish that delight.
Though other names I call the gods and call them not gods, yet may I in secrecy own their enormous transient souls to be our tides the masts are bobbing, rise and fall. For the Mother of Love has her inscrutable favor irradiated over me, I poisoned smile her smile and I see her smiling while I sicken. And the squall of Mars' cornet reels me into the wars nostrils aflare as if I were the horse War-horse that Whirlwind to the Sufferer among his horrible sores and losses did describe, so he forgot the things that were and might be, and his hairs on end stood.
After a year I came again to the place; The tireless lights and the reverberation, The angry thunder of trains that burrow the ground, The hunted, hurrying people were still the same  But oh, another man beside me and not you! Another voice and other eyes in mine! And suddenly I turned and saw again The gleaming curve of tracks, the bridge above  They were burned deep into my heart before, The night I watched them to avoid your eyes, When you were saying, &ldquo;Oh, look up at me!&rdquo; When you were saying, &ldquo;Will you never love me?&rdquo; And when I answered with a lie. Oh then You dropped your eyes. I felt your utter pain. I would have died to say the truth to you. After a year I came again to the place  The hunted hurrying people were still the same....
A cigarette boat on a Bahama run cuts like scissors along the horizon. Up and down Indian River cabin cruisers sleep. The great false banyan tree strangles the palm. Immigrant starlings stare down the doves, and the sun comes out of the sea and shines between the Barcelona and the Fountaine Bleau. Something is dying here, something is being born in this park, this small patch of ragged wilderness where the last raccoon lives, where barracuda wait in slack tide along the seawall, and philodendrons, split-leaves and elephant ears, climb the trees entwined with morning glories going for the light. Here in the shadows are the blood and feathers of sacrifice, the still-smoking pyres of Santeria under casaurina, palmetto, and mangrove. Here is the place where lovers and dealers make their transactions. Here is a man in a light silk suit walking a black panther on a chain. Here are the bearded rabbis wringing their hands. Here are the monk parakeets and the red-crowned parrots. The first siren fades down Collins. Something stirs in the weeds near the broken wall where lizards pulse in the sun. He groans. He takes a deep breath and throws off his newspaper roof, stands up in his nest, tucks in his shirt and brushes the twigs from his hair. He steps through the tangle of grasses between the green blades under the slender palm, stoops to pick the sandburs from his socks, stretches his aching body and walks off to hunt a meal on the street where Jaguars and limousines with black windows pass in the shadows of the white hotels.
Tonight we come to praise Her splendor, not her years, Pure form and what it burns  Who teaches this or learns?  Intrinsic, beyond tears, Splendor that has no age. Take your newfangled beauties off the stage! The high poise of the throat That dazzled every heart  Who was not young and awed By beauty so unflawed It seemed not life, but art?  Terrible as a swan Young children, deeply moved, might look upon. The blazing sapphire eyes  They looked out from a queen. Yet there was wildness near; She glimmered like a deer No hunter could bring down. So warm, so wild, so proud She moved among us like a light-brimmed cloud. The way her dresses flowed! So once in Greece, so once ... Passion and its control. She drew many a soul To join her in the dance. Give homage fierce as rage. Take your new-fangled beauties off the stage!
The night is black and the forest has no end; a million people thread it in a million ways. We have trysts to keep in the darkness, but where or with whom of that we are unaware. But we have this faith that a lifetime's bliss will appear any minute, with a smile upon its lips. Scents, touches, sounds, snatches of songs brush us, pass us, give us delightful shocks. Then peradventure there's a flash of lightning: whomever I see that instant I fall in love with. I call that person and cry: &lsquo;This life is blest! For your sake such miles have I traversed!&rsquo; All those others who came close and moved off in the darkness I don't know if they exist or not.
They were introduced in a grave glade And she frightened him because she was young And thus too late. Crawly crawly Went the twigs above their heads and beneath The grass beneath their feet the larvae Split themselves laughing. Crawly crawly Went the cloud above the treetops reaching For a sun that lacked the nerve to set And he frightened her because he was old And thus too early. Crawly crawly Went the string quartet that was tuning up In the back of the mind. You two should have met Long since, he said, or else not now. The string quartet in the back of the mind Was all tuned up with nowhere to go. They were introduced in a green grave.
The poem on the page was always indeed the same text, which is to say, the same stranger encountered each time as if for the first time. And like a stranger, it was greeted with questions: Who are you? Where do you come from? What do you want?  and was, finally, because it lacked a voice, accosted with shamans and other diviners who were voluble in answering for it. The poem in the mind and in the mouth, the remembered poem, spoke itself again. It was a friend as close as one's own breath. For the space of its speech, all other words lay down in its voice and became its words. Spoken by the poem, harkening as they spoke it, even soothsayers and interpreters grew idle and happy in a charm of feeling.
Whose are these faces clinging to the gate That seem to have been left out in too much rain, Blown-back leaves shimmered on a bent pane, Which soften, work loose, fall? It is getting late As I swing round on shoals of small stone Crowded with damp air, skirmishing about With blocks of shadow, this whole house wishing It had been somewhere else. Here is where alone Is growing visible, spreading its mesh wide, Easing itself always between things left and taken. The car is drenched with mud, dance-tunes shaken Out of the past's throat as I drove where the trees died Along the Roman road; from each tall going-down The sap dried, a December night half-healing The struck sets of bone, the growth-rings wheeling From the young sapling to the full tree: crown Crushed out, roots loose to the stars. I am there, Where something fragile as blur on the warm windscreen Hangs to old furniture, the once, the might-have-been Of things. The faces rustle to the wind, asking me where They must take themselves, being creatures of blossom, gleam, Shifts of nothing much on brick, the interlace Of black waxes, thickets of lost green: the wrong place Gathers the ghosts of love into its own right dream.
Then from their poverty they rose, From dry catarrhs, and to guitars They flitted Through the palace walls. They flung monotony behind, Turned from their want, and, nonchalant, They crowded The nocturnal halls. The lacquered loges huddled there Mumbled zay-zay and a-zay, a-zay. The moonlight Fubbed the girandoles. And the cold dresses that they wore, In the vapid haze of the window-bays, Were tranquil As they leaned and looked From the window-sills at the alphabets, At beta b and gamma g, To study The canting curlicues Of heaven and of the heavenly script. And there they read of marriage-bed. Ti-lill-o! And they read right long. The gaunt guitarists on the strings Rumbled a-day and a-day, a-day. The moonlight Rose on the beachy floors. How explicit the coiffures became, The diamond point, the sapphire point, The sequins Of the civil fans! Insinuations of desire, Puissant speech, alike in each, Cried quittance To the wickless halls. Then from their poverty they rose, From dry guitars, and to catarrhs They flitted Through the palace walls.
There was Homey, over the Cut, Homer Barrett, former Mayor, of Gloucester, and as I came up, Superintendent, of Streets, a play-maker of the Old Renaissance, and not I his Poliziano, there was a Gloucester of that as much as there is still, here, at least, on the Fort, Neolithic family life: Rank sayeth, in great error, there is mother (family), father (heir)  &amp; (self). Self, he says (hero, poet, psychoanalyst, in that order (!): boo, Rank. As though sociology wasn't as chewed as Homer's (Barrett's, that is) cigar, nervous little Homey, with fingers as fine as a woman's, and after he was through using the public till for the public's spill-out, evenings, to the Park only when the Two Brothers of the American Oil Co. led Homer over, was there dirty money, out of Gloucester : money was, small, and a percent given back, in forms of favor. But with Homer, in City Hall, and prior, when Alderman, after the Prohibition of the 19th Century, when America was, for the first time, Renaissance (before Arizona came) when there was money enough, for the first time, Homer spent it, took his take, from the West End of Main Street, and put it back, in entertainment, over the Park his fingers, finally, delicately jabbing the fertilized top-soil, of his flower garden, in the spring, to transfer plants he had grown earlier, from glass-covered boxes, to earth. Homey was a form of power as child (collective guilt as collective soul) more to the tone of Politian than post-2nd WorldWar American ad- ult, the gross individual of presumed progress (collective bitch for Army life, the get-mine honesty of this? the modest, straight advance, to World Wide News? the self, all self-selves having that's his, or hers, problem? a term, of possibility, of the soul, that any one of us proves something by showing these evidences of any one of us's ability to, separately, make evident that we can do the things that we are responsible for? Responsible (said Rank) for being fathers, for achieving our immortality in our said children? Procreation? a secondary function of man: if man does not spill out his being so, if he hath not the axis, unwearingly revolving in the act of initial creation not the reproduction of nature alone, this getting-it because they got you what child is it (born male) to be an heir? to be a mother, to be a self? When I was a Blue Deer Viola Barrett was my mother, and when I was a child Homer Barrett brought us in the world, at Stage Fort children, and grown-ups, of the City of Gloucester, not at all to speak of what he supported, and took his take from, when Mayor, so that 1923, 300 years after, if I wasn't an Italian poet, it wasn't also Florence But it was indeed a New Empire
Visiting your home town After many a year  The new railway station is the old one Just a little larger The feet seem to know the streets Despite the litter (No need to reason, to remember) The shoes turn into grubby plimsolls The trousers into shorts The jacket into a sweater You appear to be shrinking (No use reasoning, remembering). Who's been misbehaving, then? Who's stayed out so late? You're in big trouble, little man.
Cine, silver of history. A few minutes finish you off in a blare of white, and the scutter and scutter and sigh, then the lamp on and the smiling that something, at least, is over. Cine, chopper of Time, mercurial slitter, century shadowing through our light: London's sepia scuttle, a toadstool whitens Nevada. Colour Zapruder. Cine. A reel was found in a vault in a place I happened on in the course of a search. This reel was not but is now the object of that search so it's over. Which is how poetry works, by the way. Like cine film it yields to the bright. Like cine film it is either print or nothing, like cine film that nothing is sky. Like cine film it's made of children who run towards you and cry.
Every loutish lad in love Thinks his wisdom great enough, <> To make all his parish stare, As though Pythagoras wandered there. <> Should old Pythagoras fall in love Little may he boast thereof. <> Days go by in foolishness. O how great their sweetness is! <> Open wide those gleaming eyes, That can make the loutish wise. <> Make a leader of the schools Thank the Lord, all men are fools. <>
When I thought I was testing you I was leaving you, watching to see if you'd save me. During this time, I died of cold, white cold, turds dogs wouldn't sniff. I thought I had died, I felt so sorry for myself. You twisted the washcloth between your hands over a basin scraped in some places blue as bullets. You laid it on my forehead gently.
Watching the river, each handful of it closing over the next, brown and swollen. Oaklimbs, gnawed at by waterfilm, lifted, relifted, lapped-at all day in this dance of non-discovery. All things are possible. Last year's leaves, coming unstuck from shore, rippling suddenly again with the illusion, and carried, twirling, shiny again and fat, towards the quick throes of another tentative conclusion, bobbing, circling in little suctions their stiff presence on the surface compels. Nothing is virtual. The long brown throat of it sucking up from some faraway melt. Expression pouring forth, all content no meaning. The force of it and the thingness of it identical. Spit forth, licked up, snapped where the force exceeds the weight, clickings, pockets. A long sigh through the land, an exhalation. I let the dog loose in this stretch. Crocus appear in the gassy dank leaves. Many earth gasses, rot gasses. I take them in, breath at a time, I put my breath back out onto the scented immaterial. How the invisible roils. I see it from here and then I see it from here. Is there a new way of looking  valences and little hooks inevitabilities, proba- bilities? It flaps and slaps. Is this body the one I know as me? How private these words? And these? Can you smell it, brown with little froths at the rot's lips, meanwhiles and meanwhiles thawing then growing soggy then the filaments where leaf-matter accrued round a pattern, a law, slipping off, precariously, bit by bit, and flicks, and swiftnesses suddenly more water than not. <> <> and  nailing each point and then each next right point, inter- locking, correct, correct again, each rightness snapping loose, floating, hook in the air, swirling, seed-down, quick
There is no inspiration in the view.  From where this acorn drops its thimbles brown  The landscape stretches like a shaggy frown; The wrinkled hills hang haggard and harsh of hue: Above them hollows the heaven's stony blue,  Like a dull thought that haunts some sleep-dazed clown  Plodding his homeward way; and, whispering down, The dead leaves dance, a sere and shelterless crew. Let the sick day stagger unto its close,  Morose and mumbling, like a hoary crone  Beneath her faggots huddled fogs that soon Shall flare the windy west with ashen glows,  Like some deep, dying hearth; and let the lone  Night come at last night, and its withered moon.
When I return from poetry as from a sea-shore To the streets of dream, what is left on waking Is whatever I was full of, naming itself: &lsquo;A colour walks around, with people hidden in it.&rsquo; A summer that was meant to mean nothing Lifted his ten fingers like a fence between us Or snow that does not fall. I felt him through An envelope, a glove touching a glove. His sound-curves so quivering, I was shorn Of all words, and hummed him with my eyes And mouth. The incomplete opening of his mouth Lives in my hand like a wound, the thought Of the subtraction and the narrowing circle Is like a turn-of-the-century spring along A delayed fuse or a graph of deep Confusions, reaching the first trees. It begins in an hour like the door-mirror Of a wardrobe cracking the memory Of an over-remembered window-door Wiping off the painted pinpoint pupils And the ringlets of music with a smile Waking in the separate mouth beside me.
Far from the house the dog tastes the air, turns tail and doubles back along its own tracks, walking the way that only a dog walks: that low-slung diagonal sideways scuttle, the hind outpacing the front on the outside almost. Back, I reckon, to the tidy yard with churns and troughs given over to flowers; across the cobbles and into its kennel. The path runs west beside a wattle fence, through a hedge, then breaks at ninety degrees to the left to a shed in the shape of an aeroplane hangar, beating its chest with its doors in the breeze, the sound that had carried downwind for a mile every night for a week. Lashing them shut, I can't help but sneak a look inside, and into the light like fish from the deep come gross things: a pig on its knees, unclean, a ram with a tail from its head and horns at the rear end, a goat on its last legs, the feet not cloven but webbed, cattle in pairs, skewbald in leather and suede and joined at the ribs, a horse in its stall, fully formed, no more than two or three hands tall ... To make for home direct involves a steeplechase of barbed-wire fences, five-bar gates and ankle-breaking stones in every ditch. I'm thinking, someone hasn't heard the last of this.
They told me to sit on the highest stool, eating ice cream to my grandfather's beckoning, his hands batons of light, knuckles chiseled in saving his people without money. Who waits for the watch that a white man brought to our stoop some weeks after his stitches healed, his eye put back from the sidewalk glimmering with vision, his wrecked car cleaned from the corner where he stacked his flesh put back by a black man from Canada? <> <> the watch says to my son named for the man who wove the eye back in its socket, who drew me from my mother in the upstairs infirmary bedroom, who pointed to my mole marked for his father. To the white man interfaced on the streetcorner: a toast from the highest stool from whenever my son sits wheeling in his own chair ticking; and to Roland, to Roland, this word from his seat of ancestral force on his feeding frequency of the high mode.
His stalk the dark delphinium Unthorned into the tending hand Releases ... yet that hour will come ... And must, in such a spiny land. The silky, powdery mignonette Before these gathering dews are gone May pierce me does the rose regret The day she did her armour on? In that the foul supplants the fair, The coarse defeats the twice-refined, Is food for thought, but not despair: All will be easier when the mind To meet the brutal age has grown An iron cortex of its own.
I like bars close to home and home run down, a signal to the world, I'm weak. I like a bar to be a home. Take this one. Same men every night. Same jokes. Traffic going by fifteen feet away and punchboards never paying off. Churn of memory and ulcer. Most of all the stale anticipation of the girl sure to walk in someday fresh from '39, not one day older, holding out her arms. Soon, I say to no one late each night, I'll be all right. I put five dollars in the jukebox and never hear a tune. I take pride drinking alone and being kind. When I walk in, people say my name. By ten, the loveliest girl in Vegas swims about the room, curving in and counter to the flow of smoke. Her evil sister swings her legs and giggles in my drink. When I'm at home, the kitchen light stays on. Help me, friend. By dawn, a hundred dogs are gnawing at my throat. My gnarled phlegm chokes up yellow. My empty room revolves tornado and my relatives are still unnamed. A dozen practiced gestures get me through the day. By five, I'm crawling up the hill, certain I'll live, my Hilltop smile perfected and my coin na&iuml;ve.
Mandarins hanged in Peking, the dead man liked his cocaine.  Go to sleep, you're rustling the straw. The dead man liked his cocaine. What does the poor man watch through the window? Till and cash.  Go to sleep, you're rustling the straw. Through the window? Till and cash. Buy yourself sausage and bread, keep hardy, keep your head.  Go to sleep, you're rustling the straw. Keep hardy, keep your head. You'll find the woman of gold, she'll cook and never scold.  Go to sleep, you're rustling the straw. She'll cook and never scold.
Thousands of days have faded, now the words I wrote in horror in calm print I read rich, famous, and with weariness half dead. <> were circling as among the shells and shards I thought of crazy Hudson and the thoughts led to me. I see his bushy beard is flecked with snow as snow falls thick and idly towards mid-winter.  There is no northwest Passage, among these icebergs, Captain! Best to put about. Our spars against the sky are crosses. But he's crazy and no longer even consults the charts.  Day after day I am not growing younger.
They had come in a carriage (which will be less than what's needed) over the hard roads. And they stop in the town to get coke, three bottles, by way of a celebration. So will the epic expand (or be expanded by) its content. So will words throw (throw up) their meaning. Words they have used (will use) are the sound (of sound), what gets us. But to go farther (he could not stop there), to look at the old people, graceless and cold, in a carriage with only one blanket between them, to keep out the cold  and it was, he said (he said), it was a coldness of the mind, too (too). Yes, poets, we had overlooked an essence, and quiet (put back into quiet), we let the tears roll down.
This 'appened in a battle to a batt'ry of the corps Which is first among the women an' amazin' first in war; An' what the bloomin' battle was I don't remember now, But Two's off-lead   Down in the Infantry, nobody cares;  Down in the Cavalry, Colonel 'e swears;  But down in the lead with the wheel at the flog  Turns the bold Bombardier to a little whipped dog! They was movin' into action, they was needed very sore, To learn a little schoolin' to a native army-core, They 'ad nipped against an uphill, they was tuckin' down the brow, When a tricky trundlin' roundshot give the knock to  They cut 'im loose an' left 'im 'e was almost tore in two  But he tried to follow after as a well-trained 'orse should do; 'E went an' fouled the limber, an' the Driver's Brother squeals: &lsquo;Pull up, pull up for  The Driver 'umped 'is shoulder, for the wheels was goin' round, An' there ain't no &lsquo;Stop, conductor!&rsquo; when a batt'ry's changin' ground; Sez 'e: &lsquo;I broke the beggar in, an' very sad I feels, &lsquo;But I couldn't pull up, not for  'E 'adn't 'ardly spoke the word, before a droppin' shell A little right the batt'ry an' between the sections fell; An' when the smoke 'ad cleared away, before the limber-wheels, There lay the Driver's Brother with 'is 'ead between 'is 'eels. Then sez the Driver's Brother, an' 'is words was very plain, &lsquo;For Gawd's own sake get over me, an' put me out o' pain.&rsquo; They saw 'is wounds was mortial, an' they judged that it was best, So they took an' drove the limber straight across 'is back 'an chest. The Driver 'e give nothin' 'cept a little coughin' grunt, But 'e swung 'is 'orses 'andsome when it came to &lsquo;Action Front!&rsquo; An' if one wheel was juicy, you may lay your Monday head 'Twas juicier for the niggers when the case begun to spread. The moril of this story, it is plainly to be seen: You 'aven't got no families when servin' of the Queen  You 'aven't got no brothers, fathers, sisters, wives, or sons  If you want to win your battles take an' work your bloomin' guns!  Down in the Infantry, nobody cares;  Down in the Cavalry, Colonel 'e swears;  But down in the lead with the wheel at the flog  Turns the bold Bombardier to a little whipped dog!
A worm In an otherwise Red apple Said: I am. It happened on a chipped China plate, At a table With twelve empty chairs. The rightful owner Of the apple Had gone into the kitchen To get a knife. She was an old woman Who forgot things easily. Dear me, She whispered.
He is twice blessed, the old one buried here beneath two names and a plastic bouquet from Choteau. He lived his grief out full. From this hill where Crees bury their dead to give them a view, he can study the meadow, the mountains back of mountains, the Teton canyon winding into stone. I want to say something wrong, say, this afternoon they are together again, he and the wife he killed by mistake in the dark and she forgives him. I don't want to admit it's cold alone in the ground and a cold run from Canada with a dog and two bottles of rye. Say he counted stones along the bottom of the Teton and the stones counted him one of them. He scrubbed and scrubbed and never could rid his floor of her stain. He smashed his radio and the outside world that came from it, and something like a radio hum went on in him the slow rest of his life. This is the first time I knew his white name. We won't bring him real flowers this afternoon jammed with the glitter of lupin and harebells. This is the west and depth is horizontal. We climb for a good view of canyons and we are never higher than others, never a chief like him. His grave is modern. His anguish goes back  the first tone from struck rock. You and I, we're civilized. We can't weep when it's needed or counts. If you die first, I'll die slow as Big Bear, my pale days thin with age, night after night, the stars callow as children.
The Countess rode out on her black horse in spring wearing her black leather riding costume. She was scouting for disciples in the countryside and flicked with her whip the rosebuds as she passed. Sweet Gwendolyn in her white dress was out gathering May flowers. Under sunshade hat, her pale face blushed to the singing bees, and her golden curls lay passive on bent shoulders as she stooped to pluck a white lily. The Countess passing by took one look, galloped up, and reined her stallion sharply in, high over the modest figure of Sweet Gwendolyn with the downcast eyes. She leaped down from her horse and knelt, laying the whip in tribute before the golden girl. That foolish one swooned forward to the ground in a great white puff of dress fabric and a scattering of flowers. At that, the Countess rose in all her black pride and put her dirty leather boot hard on Gwendolyn's bent neck, pushing down the golden head to the grass, and gave her a smart lash across her innocently upturned behind. Gwendolyn looked up with begging eyes and a small whimper of submission, as the Countess pushed her over and threw the skirt up, exposing legs and bottom bare, and shoved the leather whip handle between squeezed thighs of virtue forcing them apart to reveal the pink pulsing maidenhood. Foolish Gwendolyn for not wearing panties but how could she have known what was in store? Her skirt fell over her head like petals of a fully-opened flower and her legs waved in the air like stamen and pistil, inviting the bee of the Countess's tongue to slip in and sip nectar in the golden fuzz. Poor Gwendolyn moaned with shame and pain as she lay back crushing her May flowers, exposed and unresisting  until the Countess, in full charge, pulled her to her feet, tied the whip end around her neck, remounted the big black horse and slowly trotted off, leading the sobbing girl a captive behind her off to her dark castle.
If the universe is spilling one way (favoring this or that) it is local abberation a brief time formation controls for in the high places where the middling finest balances work equilibrium shimmers like any lack of trouble in a still of mirrors: oh, if one is skeptical and smart and sees through the boxes of practice the blank beyond of disbelief, he needs mercy's help for the knowing: but, on the other hand, to waken in an ultimate extremity, death or love, to a reveille bleaching out the colorful pennants of belief! a predicament underpinning will have few resources to rescue one from: but if you sit still (there's a name for that) balancing and unbalancing move aside: among the leanest gaps of value, a tiny motion, narrow and fast, so fine it scorches your hands with having it or not having it, a catchball of gusts too indeterminate to name, invisible and practically imperceptible anyhow, there's a difference (where there is hardly any) there's a difference going one way or the other.
&lsquo;They're going out&rsquo;, she said.  Together we watch them go, The dark crossed on the dusk,  The slow slide overhead And the garden growing cold,  Flowers bent into grey, The fields of earth and sky  Losing their strength to hold The common lights of day  Which warm our faces still. Feet in the rustling grass  We watch them pass away, The heavy web of sound  Catching at her throat. We stand there hand-in-hand,  Our steady, shifting ground Spreading itself to sand,  The crisp and shining sea. Wave upon wave they go,  And we stand hand-in-hand, The slow slide overhead,  Stitched on a roll of air, As if they knew the way,  As if they were not dead.
The light we call stars has traveled a great distance to shine above this field rimmed by black pines in New Hampshire. Whatever we see in each other must be the distance we've come in our lives and all we've brought with us. Though we shared the same dinner tonight, the food that sustained our parents still sustains us: the pig slaughtered and smoked in a cold November farmyard, the tray of herrings in sour cream from a chilled case at the Appetizing. Though we cling to the few words of Yiddish that match Pennsylvania Dutch, our mothers could never have spoken, and that distance also exists between us. It is as though we try to make love, and our bed keeps filling with forebears who bicker at such a furious pitch we cannot tell the oppressors from victims. Jews rode in cattle cars east to their deaths, and the wives and children of Mennonites rode west in those cars, bound for Berlin, delivered from Stalin. Opa wore a Hitler moustache and slicked his hair in the thirties, reading German propaganda in Canada, refusing to speak one more word of Russian. Old and blind, he still detests red, even in sunsets. You said if you saw someone drowning, the only kind of person you might not save would be German, but you probably would throw a rope even to one of us.
<> And many came with hearts aflame and swords all burnished bright; And other heavy laden ones who, toiling on life's road, Forgot that Christ had promised to bear their heavy load, Came struggling in the open door and dropped into a seat, But failed to lay their burdens at the blessed Saviour's feet. We sang the hymn &ldquo;Redeeming Love,&rdquo; and then we knelt in prayer, Not knowing that one steeped in sin had gathered with us there; Then we arose and each in turn began of Christ to talk, And some rejoiced and others moaned o'er life's intricate walk; And when the Holy Spirit had pervaded every heart, The weak grew strong, for all their doubts were bidden to depart. We felt that faithful, earnest prayer would unlock heaven's door, Lo, in our very midst, there stood a drunkard on the floor; He'd wandered down the narrow street and stopped and made his bed Upon the steps that to the very mercy-seat had led, Where the thrilling songs of Zion and the atmosphere of prayer, And the host of the invisibles floated on the evening air. They roused him from his stupor, smote his conscience and his heart, For he saw that with &ldquo;the chosen&rdquo; even here he had no part; And struggling to control himself and decently appear, He laid aside his tattered hat and to the desk drew near. The muttered words stuck in his throat as hard he strove to speak: &ldquo;My friends, I've been a drinking,&rdquo; were uttered low and weak. &ldquo;Put the man out,&rdquo; they quickly cried, &ldquo;how dare he interfere? This is no place for drunkards, only the good are here.&rdquo; And as the men advanced to take the poor intruder out, He placed his hands behind him and despairing gazed about. There rested such a look upon his now quite sobered face Of hopelessness: it seemed to say, &ldquo;they thrust me from this place.&rdquo; Where prayers are made for erring ones. Christ says to all mankind: &ldquo;That whosoe'er believing comes shall full salvation find.&rdquo; Strong hands were laid upon him and they led him to the door, And from the church steps down he went perhaps to rise no more. Who knows but that a hasty step his lasting doom may seal. Though sense of his unworthiness he yet may keenly feel. Perhaps we, too, are erring, let us turn our eyes within; Perhaps we'll have no trouble in discovering secret sin. If the question were but answered how our cases stood The echo of the answer would be: no, not one is good. Let us be like Samaritans, and stoop when passing by, To raise a fallen brother and to hear the needy's cry.
I  I pressed execute, it beeped twice and faded <> That wild harmony I heard in the wings Made me think nuns in ecstatic chapels Sang these songs to god, and their software hums Behind this choir of thrilled lament Like that millennial sound of shrieking Bulgarian angels en jouissance As the people here grew colder she began To spend her evenings with her computer She'd never felt such pleasure nothing Else seemed to matter to that lonely And lost girl
I have never lived among alleys but I have loved them as other men love fields or the irregular grain of weathered wood. Driving through small towns, I find myself making change, plugging in nickels for a brief citizenship where boys and bums huddle in the shadows. There is so much to be said for alleys. I am like a scholar reading bricks with their intricate, initialed histories, the cracks unseaming everything, the love letter wedged in the grit, still readable. There are people who live everywhere, with names and lives more open from an alley (who worries how the back of the house will look?) and there is a dog you can coax from a doorway. It is in the smallest things you can discover the secret of standing still, the grace unrepentant of an alley weed, the letter which waits to propose love again and again to whoever comes, the dog sleeping in an alley, barking softly, getting up to follow a man on a plain hillside.
In the absence of such wings as were denied us we insist on inheriting others from the machine. The eggs that we incubate bring forth in addition to saints monsters, the featherless brood whose one thing in common with dunnocks is that they do not migrate. We are fascinated by evil; almost you could say it is the plumage we acquire by natural selection. There is a contradiction here. Generally subdued feathers in birds are compensated for by luxuriant song. Not so these whose frayed notes go with their plain clothes. It is we who, gaudy as jays, make cacophonous music under an egg-shell sky.
Spooned in African food, the moon sucks vegetable orchids in what anthropology calls the useless curiosity. Now tenor kiss &ldquo;Welcome&rdquo; tenor love  the parasite flower has flourished, in wounded dancing, with astounding equatorial eloquence. When the moon's scientists excavate these puritan paranoid scars black feathered jazz will again speak its loving entreaty: &ldquo;Welcome&rdquo;, finally.
When I look down, I see the season's blinding flowers, the usual mesmerizing and repellent artifacts: a frat boy who turns too sharply from my stare, a cardinal capturing vision in a lilac bush on my walk home. I'm left to long even for simple dangers. From the waist up it's still winter, I left the world behind a long time ago; waist down it's catching up, a woodpecker out my window is mining grubs from some nameless tree squirrels scramble over. When I turn back it's gone, I hadn't realized this had gone so far. (Everywhere I look it's suddenly spring. No one asked if I would like to open drastically. Look up. It's gone.) Everywhere fruits dangle I can't taste, their branches insurmountable, my tongue burnt by frost. White boys, white flowers, and foul-mouthed jays, days made of sky-blue boredoms and everything seen much too clearly: the utterance itself is adoration, kissing stolid air. I hate every lovely thing about them.
Eve, Her mind now filled with The red, voluptuous curve of the apples, Glances over at her husband On what we will call Friday night. We can only imagine the night sky, The fresh stars burning in the clear air, The symphony of insects, the lost cries of animals whose contracts God will, to put it gently, Decide not to pick up on option. Eve glances over at her husband With a pang she can only name as not hunger. As Adam sits there, weeds and the dry husks of insects In a semi-circle at his feet, His tongue dry with names, The joints of his shoulders sore from the lifting and asking, Eve walks towards him, Apple extended in her hand, Neither one quite sure of what Her body is trying to promise.
Sealion, salmon, offshore  Salt-fuck desire driving flap fins North, south, five thousand miles Coast, and up creek, big seeds Groping for inland womb. Geese, ducks, swallows, paths in the air I am a frozen addled egg on the tundra My petrel, snow-tongued kiss her a brook her mouth of smooth pebbles her tongue a bed icewater flowing in that Cavern dark, tongue drifts in the creek  blind fish On the rainy boulders On the bloody sandbar I ate the spawned-out salmon I went crazy Covered with ashes Gnawing the girls breasts Marrying women to whales Or dogs, I'm a priest too I raped your wife I'll eat your corpse
The snow revives in the apple trees; The winter sun seeps from jonquils Bright as goldmills on the slopes; <> Curves for the Alps and vanishes. Pierre le Boiteux  Yellow teeth Gnashed into gum-level Stumps, yellow Eyes beaconing about, A blackhead the size Of a huckleberry Making a cheek sag, A leg gypsies Cut the tendon of So he could beg as a child Pumping under him, Twelve goats at heel  Mounts the track, Limping through the wild Grasses toward where? The track vanishes in a heap of stones Mortared with weeds and wildflowers  The fallen church. Nearby stand stones Of the parish graves, dates worn away, A handful of carved words visible: <> <> Sown here even to their fingertips. Who was it wore the track through the grass? Surely their mourners are dead, and theirs, and theirs. Perhaps Pierre limps up every day Training the goats where to come when it is time, Foreseeing a terrible loneliness. No one is lonely here: take V&eacute;ronique Jacques, Husband of another, indifferently dissolves into her. A skull or two, a couple of pelvises or knees. My hand on the sky Cannot shut the sky out Any more than any March Branch can. In the Boston Store Once, I tried new shoes: The shoeman put my feet In a machine, saying Kid Wrig yer toes. I Wrigged and peered: Inside green shoes green Twigs were wrigging by themselves Green as the grasses I drew from her Hair in the springtime While she laughed, unfoliaged By sunlight, a little Spray of bones I loved. From villages lost in the valleys  Moncharvet, St. Bon, La Jaura  Thin braids of smoke waver upward Through the clear air. A few lights Come on, visible from the untracked snow On the stairway to the Alps. Venus Shines from the grave of the sun, like The white gem churched again in its valley. Once driving from Morristown at night, We came over a crest: the Fish-Island Breached shining under the strung-out stars Of the Galaxy a long way from Jacques And Genevi&egrave;ve and V&eacute;ronique in the prairie. We stood there not thinking that for them This was a strange continent to be dying in, This island under the continent of the stars  Job's Coffin and the Scorpion; Jacques And Genevi&egrave;ve side by side in a field of lights; Capricorn, Ophiocus; the Serpent embracing The unhinged knees, St. Bon heaped Like a molted skin: Le Fourmier the arms Of Hercules; the Swan sailing toward Planay; Moncharvet, La Jaura by the singing Lyre, V&eacute;ronique rocked on the Balances; Champ B&eacute;ranger  Fields into which the limping Herdsman wades Leading his flock up the trackless night, towards A writhing of lights. Are they Notre Dame des Neiges Where men ask their God for the daily bread  Or the March-climbing Virgin carrying wheat? Where the track vanishes the first land begins. It goes out everywhere obliterating the horizons. We must have been walking through it all our lives.
As if we were two separate bodies rising on two separate breaths we work on different levels one even goes away far while the other enacts a spiral circling of the house the enabling tasks are satisfying and outside everywhere life contrives endless varieties of parcels each breathing water air or light even though we love and are confused by appearance walking home the cat avoids the skunk they are both so shiny are the leaves not the season are the bedclothes which you have straightened not the root of a dreamless interstice the harness tenderly rendered invisible first then retrieved
cain't nobody tell me any different i'm ugly and you know it too you just smiling to make me feel better but i see how you stare when nobody's watching you. i know i'm short black and skinny and my nose stopped growin fo it wuz 'posed to i know my hairs short, legs and face ashy and my clothes have holes that run right through to you. so i sit all day long just by myself so i jump the sidewalk cracks knowin i cain't fall cuz who would want to catch someone who looks like me who ain't even cute or even just a little tall. cain't nobody tell be any different i'm ugly anybody with sense can see. but. one day i hope somebody will stop me and say looka here. a pretty little black girl lookin' just like me.
I was waiting my turn in the butcher's shop Someone said: It's a shame. Her face and her body seemed different But her eyes were just the same. The smile just fell right off my face, I couldn't recall her name. Then she said to me: Have you heard what Joanne is up to? She went back to that dangerous town Trying to locate her magistrate. Seems like he'd gone to ground. Then luckily she met Lucy In the burned-out shopping mall. She brought in Flossie with her little posse And they really had a ball.  It was a Monday like any Monday  Every Monday is the same  It was a Monday like any Monday  And I couldn't recall her name. With a little bit of bootleg software From the Bobby Swanberg file They put the bite on a Trotskyite So he hipped them for a while. Round the clock they watched the Galaxy Hotel From a rented motorboat. It was ten to one on that the fox had gone But they had to play every note.  It was a Monday like any Monday  Every Monday is the same  It was a Monday like any Monday  And I couldn't recall her name. Well human beings are human beings, You know everybody has to blink And the Monktown pack crawled around the back And soon the water turned pink. Well Joanne she rang me later From the special callbox at the Zoo. She was cut off, sure, but just before  She told me that she must see you ...  It was a Monday like any Monday  If you play the Monday game  It was a Monday like any Monday  And I couldn't recall her name.
I liked it there liked the way I could call into it there is no light! and it would echo backlight! I liked the way it sounded, my voice calling there is no light!and the chorus back calling light!So I went often, stayed long listening to my voice and the chorus it called from the dark. But once, after much calling and echoing, my voice failed, and as it failed, the echo faded and I said to myself there is no light. No light I said again, and there was no echo. No light I whispered because my voice had failed and there was no echo. So I turned whispering light and I ran saying light and I found my way out and called light!finding my voice again in a chorus calling back light from a dark place.
<>  The House is shut and still, There is nothing more to say. Through broken walls and gray  The winds blow bleak and shrill They are all gone away. Nor is there one to-day  To speak them good or ill: There is nothing more to say. Why is it then we stray  Around the sunken sill? They are all gone away, And our poor fancy-play  For them is wasted skill: There is nothing more to say. There is ruin and decay  In the House on the Hill: They are all gone away, There is nothing more to say.
Asleep so early, you who once darted ahead through the night. I remember those conversations at 3 A.M. with the streetlight slanting across the room and the bright points of your eyes  only a year ago and you seemed almost well. But now, dinner over, you doze until I harry you awake and up those tiny cliffs, the stairs. What kind of grace have you forced me to that I can tell no one how it is to lie here cupping your hand between my breasts. Even this poem rises into the room like a trapped bird that circles and circles, strangely calm, strangely mute, as if hope of escape were itself contained, until it sinks again under my palm. O my heart, nothing will grow from this desolation, least of all words.
arouse yrself, Bigmans, arouse cities, things crumples of tin, And dead men in Bigmans, start moving, start the next heave, leave your mother's fire: your brothers have had enough derisions despitous, of many filths though fructuous Take to the streets, Bigmans, to the streets, go to the whore, begin: she is sib, wrong boy daintiness of limbs or fingers, of hair of hunger for the fruits of gods, of lair of twisting paths, of proper movement, hers hath shrunk to kill, to fear, she sits by property defiled, by stories rifled of initiation, she who is ground, who is a well, who is night who is made nothing of now, eyeless though powered Bigmans, yr place is out, out from inside, you've slept enough the self, got fat b'exceptionality, your own and generally. Let go, hulk, pull out from her house, dispose your strength where others are, where they lie as things do, as cities, waiting to be waked Bigmans, this is an asking, is a demand, we ask you
Somewhere before the gate or at the iron gate or as a kind of gate Somewhere within the court the wet loam of the court As somewhere inside a room before the photograph of a photograph Before a braided rope Dark blue dress with silver threads Before the mention of birch cupola, caw of crows almost sunken boat Or the circles of ice as they grow in silence on the windows
Somewhere, married and in love, we walked through streets planted with linden trees. There were ramparts, buttresses, ancient fragments bonded with newer masonry that was old too. The warmth of the day just ending stretched itself on the stones, a golden dog. People were strolling, there were no cars to speak of, and we, we were only passing through. What chance imperative held us on course toward what train? Nothing I can remember, no better city. Quiet avenues. Lamps coming on. The sky still full of light. I can't remember arriving nor leaving, and even while we were there it seems we were somewhere else, inattentive. But the lindens were blossoming, their perfume, mysterious, pianissimo, filled the whole town: every few years that remembrance briefly returns, as if a fragment of dream; but I know it was history, a bit of my life, a bit of the life of Europe. The past. We failed to linger as if the lindens only spoke over this gulf of time.
Ever since he arrived in this country From a warmer climate A more constant light Had difficulty breathing. After all the years Not even this clemency of the weather Makes it better. Certain cells Are dying, and the body's Tolerance for liquids, foods Declines, for medicaments, for air. No tolerance for pleasure As the exfoliations of the nerve-ends By a lifetime's effort disciplined To fine discriminations of desire Twitch now their ghosts Throb in fire Beyond the charred stumps of feelings. Nobody's love can reach Into the purity Of such isolation. In the instant of his pain's surcease He recalls as in a rearview mirror A pheasant glimpsed beside the road His fender struck last summer Half its feathers Scattered like a fallen cloud In convulsive trials to rise Wildly unable just to acquiesce to What glazed the golden pupils of its eyes.
No doubt the creation was something like this  A cold day breaking on silent stones, Slower than time, spectacular only in size. First there is darkness, then somehow light; We call this day, and the other night, And watch in vain for the second of sunrise. Suddenly, near at hand, the click of a wooden shoe  An old woman among the primeval shapes Abroad in the field of light, sombrely dressed. She calls good-day, since there are bad days too, And her eyes go down. She has seen perhaps Ten thousand dawns like this, and is not impressed. All fly away at my approach, As they have done time out of mind, And hide in the thicker leaves to watch The shadowy ingress of mankind. My whistle-talk fails to disarm Presuppositions of ill-will; Although they rarely come to harm The ancient fear is in them still. Which irritates my  As an enlightened alien And renders yet more wide the gap From their world to the world of men. So perhaps they have something after all  Either we shoot them out of hand Or parody them with a bird-call Neither of us can understand. They are all round me in the dark With claw-knives for my sleepy anarch  Beasts of the field, birds of the air, Their slit-eyes glittering everywhere. I am man self-made, self-made man, No small-talk now for those who ran In and out of my muddy childhood. We have grown up as best we could. Now at the end I smell the smells of spring Where in a dark ditch I lie wintering, And the little town only a mile away Happy and fatuous in the light of day. A bell tolls gently; I should start to cry But my eyes are closed and my face dry  I am not important and I have to die. Strictly speaking I am already dead But still I can hear the birds sing on over my head.
<> <> <> <> <> <> <> <>   <> <> <> <> <> <> <>
<>  Our wrongs let's be forgetting, For words bring only useless pain,  So wherefore then be fretting. Let's lay aside imagined wrongs,  And ne'er give way to grieving, Life should be filled with joyous songs,  No time left for deceiving. I'll try and not give way to wrath,  Nor be so often crying; There must some thorns be in our path,  Let's move them now by trying. How, like a foolish pair were we,  To fume about a letter; Time is so precious, you and me  Must spend ours doing better.
this evangelist buttons with his big gollywog voice the kingdomofheaven up behind and crazily skating thither and hither in filthy sawdust chucks and rolls against the tent his thick joggling fists he is persuasive the editor cigarstinking hobgoblin swims upward in his swivelchair one fist dangling scandal while five other fingers snitch rapidly through mist a defunct king as linotypes gobblehobble our lightheavy twic twoc ingly attacks landing a onetwo which doubles up suddenly his bunged hinging victim against the giving ropes amid screams of deeply bulging thousands i too omit one kelly in response to howjedooze the candidate's new silk lid bounds gently from his baldness a smile masturbates softly in the vacant lot of his physiognomy his scientifically pressed trousers ejaculate spats a strikingly succulent getup but we knew a muffhunter and he said to us Kid. daze nutn like it.
In a town in which to have tried three times he rose and he spent such afternoons  between his friends,  at Jim's and Tom's and out, having so chuckled of each to the other he'd never be out of touch. Days were for blame and invite; nights were many though he could have had more, he reckoned,  and every second  was up in lights but he tottered home and peered at his board for messages, and the word was LORD. And then it was blank and always so, a tabula rasa coloured lavender  only. The calender  had less to show as he riffled it forwards. Here came Jim but he'd gone by then, when here came Tom. The next fresh four a.m. he was treading deazil around the Lake and the thought  in his head was what  he was clearly reading on stones, dates and pages, an ache to hear, register, shiver, and speak to stranger and stranger, mentioned, shunned, a punchline: he would wait in the dust  all night for the first  and freezing sound of the barracking cock, and a surge of sudden what? then home to his hissing garden and huge, turning keys. In a town in which to have tried three times he would lie  as the very day  would break, with his fawn long arms hiding the falls of his face from his own words spreading through the whole of space.
Dr Animus, whose philosophy is a table, sits down contentedly to a square meal. The plates lie there, and there, just where they should lie. His feet stay just where they should stay, between legs and the floor. His eyes believe the clean waxed surfaces are what they are. But while he's eating his un- exceptional propositions, his wise wife, Anima, sweeping a haze-gold decanter from a metaphysical salver, pours him a small glass of doubt. Just what he needs. He smacks his lips and cracks his knuckles. The world is the pleasure of thought. He'd like to stay awake all night (elbows on the table) talking of how the table might not be there. But Anima, whose philosophy is hunger, perceives the plates are void in empty air. The floor is void beneath his trusting feet. Peeling her glass from its slender cone of fire, she fills the room with love. And fear. And fear.
<> Christ, when I see thee hanging there alone 2 in ivory upon an ebon throne,   2 like Pan, pard-girded, chapleted with bays; 1 I kiss thy mouth, I see thee in a haze,  1 but not of tears, and not the briar crown ...  2 Is it, O Sufferer, my heart is stone?  2 Am I, in truth, the Judas who betrays 1 To hang in shame above a gory knoll,  3 to die of scorn upon a splintered pole,  3 this was not beautiful, I know, for thee ... 4 Would I have whispered upon Calvary,  4 &ldquo;An interesting silhouette, there, see!&rdquo; 4 while God groaned in the dark night of his soul? 3
Spring has no promise more than frost For us; it does not say that men Will bud and burgeon in new birth, The legions of the buried resurrect To greet the Son, he come within, The very season of his outward leaving; It is not guaranteed that God, Coming from the south with light and love, Will touch the seed, melt our crusts And bestir Himself in us When earth moves from cold to warmth. The promise not contained in earthly change Is given in the nature of our long growth, The cycles of the soul are sure as those Of sap, the spirit breaking free at last; Not death but resurrection is the end, All being born will be born again And men bestir themselves in God  Not death to God but life in him  Winter shall give way to spring within.
<> The streamers loosen and travel. The red west is stopped with a gray haze. They fill the ash trees, the wrap the oaks, They make a long-tailed rider In the pocket of the first, the earliest evening star. Three muskrats swim west on the Desplaines River. Better the blue silence and the gray west, The autumn mist on the river, And not any hate and not any love, And not anything at all of the keen and the deep: Only the peace of a dog head on a barn floor, And the new corn shoveled in bushels And the pumpkins brought from the corn rows, Umber lights of the dark, Umber lanterns of the loam dark. Here a dog head dreams. Not any hate, not any love. Not anything but dreams. Brother of dusk and umber.
The night my husband killed me I thought I was by myself. Come in from the hunt, from grave robbing, dragging the streaky, milky corpses, winching them onto the kitchen table, he sweated from his work and went to work. That night I walked in the yard under a shower of stars, whole constellations, galaxies coming apart, racing toward earth. You could smell the desert, sulfurous in the heat, metallic, like a sword rubbed against stone. I never heard him approach, felt the prick of the blade then nothing. How is it now I wake? Where am I now? The light itself seems solid, though forms pass through it. Now he slices me chin to groin, lifts my blue guts out. I feel his big hands inside my chest. My legs and arms become the legs of a table he eats his breakfast on. He wears my backskin for a cape. My head's a lamp he reads by late at night. Through empty sockets I watch him turn the pages of his book, and wonder what it is in there that makes him giggle.
Ah well! ah well! maybe the young have learned some sense. They ought at last to see through the game, they've sat long enough on the fence. Maybe their little bottoms will get tired and sore at last of sitting there on the fence, and letting their good youth go to waste. Maybe a sense of destiny will rise in them one day, maybe they'll realise it's time they slipped into the fray. Maybe they're getting tired of sitting on the fence; it dawns on them that the whole damn swindle is played at their expense.
We come to watch and to wait: Perhaps to shout. Twenty people On the promenade, an arc of the sea Behind us, and a police dog in streaming Gold fording a rock pool. At my shoulder a small pressure: A man in a grey suit And sunglasses, his red crewcut Like a saucer of iron filings. Above us the legs of the police Are screwed into stone; Strangers on the roofs squint Through lenses, their cameras Feeding on our shadows. And suddenly our chorus is blowing away. I can examine my voice As if it was a creature washed from the sea. Then someone waves and the black Limousines have disappeared. In the restaurant we queue for takeaways. Hello, says a voice. You're finished now? The aluminium foil Is like a mirror in his hands, A bead of sweat on every thorn of his hair. Then he puts on his sunglasses And rubs out my face.
The stairs lead to the room as bleak as glass Where fancy turns the statues. The empty chairs are dreaming of a protocol, The tables, of a treaty; And the world has become a museum. (The girl is gone, Fled from the broken altar by the beach, From the unholy sacrifice when calms became a trade-wind.) The palaces stare out from their uncurtained trouble, And windows weep in the weak sun. The women fear the empty upper rooms More than the streets as grey as guns Or the swordlight of the wide unfriendly esplanade. Thoughts turn to salt among those shrouded chairs Where, with knives no crueller than pens, or promises, Took place the painless slaying of the leader's daughter. O, humbler than the truth she bowed her head, And scarcely seemed, to us, to die. But after she was killed she fled, alive, like a surprise, Out of the glass world, to Diana's Tauris. Then wind cheered like a hero in the tackle of the standing ships And hurled them bravely on the swords and lances of the wintry sea  While wisdom turned to salt upon the broken piers. This is the way the ministers have killed the truth, our daughter, Steps lead back into the rooms we fear to enter; Our minds are bleaker than the hall of mirrors: And the world has become a museum.
Still you bring us with our hands bound, Our teeth knocked out, our heads broken, Still you bring us shouting curses, Or crying, or silent as tomorrow, Still you bring us to the guillotine, The shooting wall, the headsman's block. Or the mass grave in the long trench. But you can't kill all of us! You can't silence all of us! You can't stop all of us! From Norway to Slovakia, Manchuria to Greece, We are like those rivers That fill with the melted snow in spring And flood the land in all directions. Our spring will come. The pent up snows of all the brutal years Are melting beneath the rising sun of freedom. The rivers of the world Will be flooded with strength And you will be washed away  You murderers of the people  You Nazis, Fascists, headsmen, Appeasers, liars, Quislings,  You will be washed away, And the land will be fresh and clean again, Denuded of the past  For time will give us Our spring At last.
Through corneas of glass i see my people black i see them homeless still and shift- less, slack and hungry, white lipped, ray mouthed, beggar at the corners, bugged, drugged, crying out to the enemy for bread they cannot worship their dead, their ancestors of centuries' steps, when they must beg, handcupped, backs to the cold wind, for shelter: stick, wall, roof, stockade of warmth: when they must eat those books you offer them: pink proverbs, blue eyed revelations i see my sisters, arethas, angelas how they have burnt their hair so near to god how they embalm their bread of breasts how they forget the sphinx accept your gentile venus i see my brothers high and nodding shadow boxing to the tune of needles angels of the fix bartering their sanity for trips around the skeleton i hear them screaming REVOLUTION as the world revolves round marcus malcolm mississippi memphis but there aint no vein of revolution only the blues and coltrane's gospel pain
Infamous for eels, bearded, wrist-thick, Some wound like electric cable round a gaff, Their truncheon heads thrusting at the air. How cold they were, vicious, familiar; Generations coiled together on bright gravel. But because they grew so great I'd devil Myself to wade upstream, thinking of eels Black and vulcanized like bicycle tyres Knotting my legs, my drowned face with the eyes Eaten. Tree roots waving in the current. Then my mind was like the stream's ferment Of lives, the water round the carcase of a steer Disturbed by the invisible, the secretive Come to feast. But if the brook was death's element, The harmless eels were the evil I'd invent.
<> Though what long thought could hold into the light Some late Aegeans made less recondite By inquiry and discourse, friend to friend. Still we were lonely, till our great godsend When the invisible took his creature's plight Of being incarnate, heart-beat day and night And a mute ignominy at the end. Now what's the upshot of his passion play If not our quaint  Or guessed at by the noble wit of Greece: All touching things are formed to pass away, Like his fine wafer breaking on the tongue, And by this perishing Being has increase.
The couples bob with numbers pasted on their backs. The girls, hair long and straight as Jeanie Shrimpton's, Primly shake; the boys in cautious Beatle cuts Jerk their heads back to show off their bangs. This antique, prepsychedelic contest Will earn the winning couple matching '66 Mustang converts, and Paul Revere and the Raiders, dressed In powdered wigs, will play their high school dance. Cut back to Dick Clark  in his arms a giant tube Of Clearasil, the lead-in for a station break. He peddles innocence like water from Lourdes, And even now must keep his age a secret (38). Black and white across twelve million sets The babyface-lifted smile, ghostly, breaks.
Spotlight her faceher face has no light in it touch the cheek with lightinform the eyes press meanings on those lips. See cities from the air, fix a cloud in the sky, one bird in the bright air, one perfect mechanical flower in her hair. Make your young men ride over the mesquite plains; produce our country on film:here are the flaming shrubs, the Negroes put up their hands in Hallelujahs, the young men balance at the penthouse door. We focus on the screen:lookthey tell us you are a nation of similar whoresremember the Maine remember you have a democracy of champagne  And slowly the female face kisses the young man, over his face the twelve-foot female head the yard-long mouth enlarges and yawns The End Here is a cityhere the village grows here are the rich men standing rows on rows, but the crowd seeps behind the cowboy the lover the king, past the constructed sets America rises the bevelled classic doorwaysthe alleys of trees are witness America rises in a wave a mass pushing away the rot. The Director cries Cut! hoarsely CUTand the people send pistons of force crashing against the CUT! CUT! of the straw men. Light is superfluous upon these eyes, across our minds push new portents of strength destroying the sets, the flat faces, the mock skies.
River under clouds Mountains in the distance Crossing Essex arm in arm two teenage girls lips half open deep in their pink dreams A white-haired baby stumbles toward his hapless mother An old man freezes in the middle of traffic No one listens to the sun No one follows the river The light turns red River of yellow cabs The first woman and man jumped off Nuwa's hand Repaired heavens Ten thousand years of sleep Sitting by the river she smiled at her last mission They waded into the water Shadows sank to the bottom Earth burnt off the last rays Their bodies turned into maps The river is no obstacle The young Jews walk whispering past Wong's Kodak Express their beards float their pants slip below their belly buttons Through his window of cosmetics the old man winks at the teenagers Women chatter at Guss Pickles The sweet and sour smell drifts toward Williamsburg Bridge Underneath a man stares at his broken bottle of coconut milk oozing into the subway grill A bee buzzes around the huge bare waist of the homeless I suddenly understand why Ted Berrigan took speed
The beautiful swimmer the extremely shy opium eater touches his hat in homage to the great pool lying still at the feet of the crow. The snow on his hat says something to me but I am a weapon with a small vocabulary hanging from a deerhorn rack. And then he plunges into the blue water into our afternoon. Oh hello there. We are squeezing a string of smoke to cause our melo- dramatic hearts to ripple up and down the spine of the world. But he just swims on sending a slight metallic shock through us. OK. When we will meet again he will be swimming back having brought a big wet clock with him from the other side of this home
Before you, I was living on an island And all around the seas of that lonely coast Cast up their imitation jewels, cast Their fables and enigmas, questioning, sly. I never solved them, or ever even heard, Being perfect in innocence; unconscious of self; Such ignorance of history was all my wealth  A geographer sleeping in the shadow of virgins. But though my maps were made of private countries I was a foreigner in all of them after you had come, For when you spoke, it was with a human tongue And never understood by my land-locked gentry. Then did the sun shake down a million bells And birds bloom on bough in wildest song! Phlegmatic hills went shivering with flame; The chestnut trees were manic at their deepest boles! It is little strange that nature was riven in her frame At this second creation, known to every lover  How we are shaped and shape ourselves in the desires of the other Within the tolerance of human change. Out of the spring's innocence this revolution, Created on a kiss, announced the second season, The summer of private history, of growth, through whose sweet sessions The trees lift toward the sun, each leaf a revelation. Our bodies, coupled in the moonlight's album Proclaimed our love against the outlaw times Whose signature was written in the burning towns. Your face against the night was my medallion. Your coming forth aroused unlikely trumpets In the once-tame heart. They heralded your worth Who are my lodestar, my bright and ultimate North, Marrying all points of my personal compass. This is the love that now invents my fear Which nuzzles me like a puppy each violent day. It is poor comfort that the mind comes, saying: What is one slim girl to the peoples' wars? Still, my dice are loaded: having had such luck, Having your love, my life would still be whole Though I should die tomorrow I had lived it all  And love is never love, that cannot give love up.
The rains of yesterday are flown, And light is on the farthest hills; The homeliest rough grass by the stone To radiance thrills; And the wet bank above the ditch, Trailing its thorny bramble, shows Soft apparitions, clustered rich, Of the pure primrose. The shining stillness breathes, vibrates From simple earth to lonely sky, A hinted wonder that awaits The heart's reply. O lovely life! the chaffinch sings High on the hazel, near and clear. Sharp to the heart's blood, sweetness springs In the morning here. But my heart goes with the young cloud That voyages the April light Southward, across the beaches loud And cliffs of white To fields of France, far fields that spread Beyond the tumbling of the waves, And touches as with shadowy tread The English graves. There too is Earth that never weeps, The unrepining Earth, that holds The secret of a thousand sleeps And there unfolds Flowers of sweet ignorance on the slope Where strong arms dropped and blood choked  breath, Earth that forgets all things but hope And smiles on death. They poured their spirits out in pride, They throbbed away the price of years: Now that dear ground is glorified With dreams, with tears. A flower there is sown, to bud And bloom beyond our loss and smart  Noble France, at its root is blood From England's heart.
The ancient forests of China logged and the hills slipped into the Yellow Sea. Squared beams, log dogs, on a tamped-earth sill. San Francisco 2&times;4s were the woods around Seattle: Someone killed and someone built, a house, a forest, wrecked or raised All America hung on a hook &amp; burned by men, in their own praise. Snow on fresh stumps and brush-piles. The generator starts and rumbles in the frosty dawn I wake from bitter dreams, Rise and build a fire, Pull on and lace the stiff cold boots Eat huge flapjacks by a gloomy Swede In splintery cookhouse light grab my tin pisspot hat Ride off to the show in a crummy-truck And start the Cat. &ldquo;Pines grasp the clouds with iron claws like dragons rising from sleep&rdquo; 250,000 board-feet a day If both Cats keep working &amp; nobody gets hurt
Blue apple of the night, apple of fear, apple of peace, the small leaves tear and hiss in their fright and the big moon screams in its rut of the darkness. Why is it hung there on the starred rug like a toy you hear broken and distant? Why shrug so? Have you not been blessed? The boy who was once a man thinks of no question as he stands blued by the dark that beckons. He lifts his hand and blots out the moon. You have done this, long ago. Perhaps you remember. And recall that toy now, and a night off far watching apples as a boy. They danced in the wind-blow. Surely, you thought, by light all will be torn. And the leaves were, but the apple held, shorn as your heart's delight nakedly crying where? why? what? Only what is never answered, nor ever is why. Stand there and watch. Small leaves rip and die at home. Like love's speech. Lift your hand, go on. Remember.
I had to go to Luton for a week: I came back on the train. The station smelt like seaweed. All the lights were blue. I squeaked across the lobby. Things went flibble-flabble through the arches; budgies swarmed inside the glass. I tiptoed through some traffic lights. A shadow scratched me. Lighted bushes steamed along the park. I hid inside a phonebox: branches combed it. Ducks marched round my feet. Then I saw them hopping out of Smiths and through the grass. They stopped and stared. The door squealed; someone reached inside and grabbed  I ripped my shirt and said I loved the sky: they went away; I love it still. Goodbye.
Instant of truth that killed remorse, Strength beyond all things strong, Secret of force renewing force, Your spring I have not sung, Unwearied through a lifetime's course, Though found on earth when young. Who might have guessed that such a gift Would come his youthful way Where nothing led him but the drift Of creatures towards decay? A weight the ages could not lift Lay dark upon my day. That word of buried light was true And set my feet above The cobbled flames the sunrise threw Reflected in the dove: There was no creature, none that grew, Excluded from His love.
Naked, he lies in the blinded room chainsmoking, cradled by drugs, by jazz as never by any lover's cradling flesh. Miles Davis coolly blows for him: O pena negra the red clay foxfire voice of Lady Day (lady of the pure black magnolias) sobsings her sorrow and loss and fare you well, dryweeps the pain his treacherous jailers have released him from for awhile. His fears and his unfinished self await him down in the anywhere streets. He hides on the dark side of the moon, takes refuge in a stained-glass cell, flies to a clockless country of crystal. Only the ghost of Lady Day knows where he is. Only the music. And he swings oh swings: beyond complete immortal now.
He says his brother's son died because the air force called him to station in a tornado and a limb from a broken tree cracked his neck; when his wife touched his shoulder he was cold. About his own children he does not talk; they run into flues blackening their skins as they whiten his hair blackfaced in entertainment, hooked on family in Minnesota summer stream. Freezing now on locked lake-ice the smoke rises from fishhouses; the black oaks shimmer in ice and break off: bunks can be filled with putty as the man who makes beds talks with his children unanswered, fingers hammered, arthritic bolts locked in his sanded joints where clear sticky varnish hides. There is no more black oak for fine furnishings; the imperfect boards cry on the jaws of horses; a man talks to himself where my children sleep, unanswered and heard.
That the vapour, stuff of lightning, rose up out of its cauldron eyes bulging, consuming all with cavernous, electric breath, static rustling the coarse hair of their bodies, the appendages drawn in the shock, feet strewn over rocky ground  pinioning the torn body that lifts to this heavenly arc of blue o so blue, the lightning unlocked, the mechanism of forest simulating the energy of the wiry horns, the energy of lightning collected in the straggled locks of a persistent sheep, unkempt Nebuchadnezzar.
Having planted our little Northern Spy at the wrong season, Having pruned it in trepidation and ignorance, having watched it Do nothing at all for a month in the drought-burned, weedy wasteland Of the front yard that prefiguring desolation! now I am Uplifted truly and in glory By the sapling's big new leaves and its stems lengthening, And my mind carries everywhere I go this image of a pale green upsprouting In the form of a fountain, a small, natural, simple fountain: And having learned at last, from an intelligent and willing young man Behind the counter at Superior Sound, Inc., on East Erie Boulevard, The conclusive difference between a ceramic and a magneticCartridge for my stereo turntable, Having placed this sparkle of knowledge in my mind like a jewel on a dark velvet ground, I glance at it hundreds of times in passing, so to speak, With a little thrill of gratification for its novelty, its actuality, And especially for its purity, its unfailing, useless betokening of what is: And every day these twinges of pain in my heart, that muscle unenvisionable, Draining me downward like the &ldquo;flow of atoms&rdquo; into cool organic earth, The quicksand, Downward in this strange new fluidity, this impersonal dissolution, Drawn by an energy somehow inside me and yet not mine  How stunning the methodical magnitudes of force!  Make me wonder, abstractedly, about the pulverization of the soul, About vast windy scattering wastes of crumbled joys and drifting knowledge, about what becomes Of all the disjuncted dregs of consciousness: This song is a wave rolling forever among the stars.
What hasn't happened intrudes, so much hasn't yet happened. In the steamy kitchens we meet in, kettles are always boiling, water for tea, the steep infusions we occupy hands and mouth with, steam filming our breath, a convenient subterfuge, a disguise for the now sharp intake, the measured outlet of air, the sigh, the gutting loneliness of the present where what hasn't happened will not be ignored, intrudes, separates from the conversation like milk from cream, desire rising between the cups, brimming over our saucers, clouding the minty air, its own aroma a pungent stress, once again, you will get up, put on your coat, go home to the safer passions, moisture clinging still to your spoon, as the afternoon wears on, and I miss, I miss you.
So he sits, the cranky bastard, all wind and discontent pissing and moaning out his litany of missed chances. The seasonal miscellany: distemper and contempt. These sadnesses, outrages, each bleak utterance eleven times more dire than the one before: all overripened versions of promise, the possible, hope, love. Whenever she visits he's on best behavior. He eats what she brings him and tries not to drool. She hugs him  all bone and damp and chill. The darkness he nods into leaves a thin horizon a wince or grin? she can never say. An old dream of beauty? Heartbreak? Something he's eaten? She gives thanks, kisses his head, gone bald now, leaves.
The March loves that Braggadocio is boasting about won't last till spring, outside it's sleeting and that whistling gale is not blowing here from Mexico. But the friendship under seven feet of snow that we two husbandmen are nourishing prudent of seasons, diffidently holding hands for warmth until the morning Oh! I'll wheel my motorcycle from the hall into April, and we two cruise behind our flapping banner in a southern wind into May. Yet will the dogwood stun again to anguish my defeated soul alone among the meadowflowers in June.
The hungry glitter of War's wolfish eyes Gleamed where the sunset dies; And then the Wind stopped at the door and laughed, Like one who tries To mask his purpose with designing craft. I knew 'twas Winter, stripping all of worth In the fair House of Earth  Of all its hoarded gold and in its place Leaving lean Dearth To ape the skeleton, Famine, with her face. Balsam and pimpernel and all the pearls Of flowers that decked the curls Of Summer, lo! he seizes for his band Of vandal churls, Famine and Frost and Death, with icy hand. The panther-tawny hills crouch round and gaze, Gaunt-faced, at Heaven; or raise Huge claws of forest, stretching them to seize The fields of maize, Who, in their terror, seem to shrink and freeze. Some jewels Autumn dropped, when taking flight, Mark with a starry white The place she stood; and patches, red as fruit, Among the blight, Show, where she fled, the imprint of her foot. Here lies the testament Earth keeps apart, For Nature, in her heart; Come, bend and read of all her joy and pride, The beautiful art She builds with, and that Love has sanctified. In root and seed read of immortal things  Of what again she brings To life dead Beauty, that no hand may bar; Of Song's wild wings And Color's palette, refuged now afar. Take hope! though now she speaks her thoughts in weeds Instead of flowers, and pleads In winds instead of birds, her book, though sealed, To him who reads, Bears messages of Spring to be revealed.
I believe in magic. I believe in the rights of animals to leap out of our skins as recorded in the Kiowa legend: <> as I believe in the resurrected wake-robin, first wet knob of trillium to knock in April at the underside of earth's door in central New Hampshire where bears are though still denned up at that early greening. I believe in living on grateful terms with the earth, with the black crumbles of ancient manure that sift through my fingers when I topdress the garden for winter. I believe in the wet strings of earthworms aroused out of season and in the bear, asleep now in the rock cave where my outermost pasture abuts the forest. I cede him a swale of chokecherries in August. I give the sow and her cub as much yardage as they desire when our paths intersect as does my horse shifting under me respectful but not cowed by our encounter. I believe in the gift of the horse, which is magic, their deep fear-snorts in play when the wind comes up, the ballet of nip and jostle, plunge and crow hop. I trust them to run from me, necks arched in a full swan's S, tails cocked up over their backs like plumes on a Cavalier's hat. I trust them to gallop back, skid to a stop, their nostrils level with my mouth, asking for my human breath that they may test its intent, taste the smell of it. I believe in myself as their sanctuary and the earth with its summer plumes of carrots, its clamber of peas, beans, masses of tendrils as mine. I believe in the acrobatics of boy into bear, the grace of animals in my keeping, the thrust to go on.
When my old heart was young, my dear, The earth and heaven were so near That in my dreams I oft could hear  The steps of airy races; In woodlands, where bright waters ran, On hills, God's rainbows used to span, I followed voices not of man,  And smiled in spirit faces. Now my old heart is old, my sweet, No longer earth and heaven meet; All life is grown to one dull street  Where fact with fancy clashes; The voices now that speak to me Are prose instead of poetry; And in the faces now I see  Is less of flame than ashes.
&lsquo;You should have been there then&rsquo;, they tell you, the girls who were there themselves. &lsquo;Before the war, your father was the kind of man to take you, on the spur of a telegram, to one of those Continental casinos where they keep the curtains drawn all summer: white ties and Sidney Bechet, gardenias on a breakfast tray. You'd follow the road map south in someone's aeroplane, putting down in a field while it was light. Oh, those were the days all right and the nights too for someone like your father.&rsquo; Then you mourn the fact once more that you missed knowing him then, that you hardly recognize this man who somehow jumped the gun and started ahead of you. It isn't fair, but there's nothing to be done. The casinos are dead and the nights are drawing in. Though you follow the road map south on the spur of a lifetime you'll never catch up with the fun and he won't be back for you. You're strung out like runners across the world, losing ground, in a race that began when you were born.
Gray emptied his guns into the war canoe so effectually as to kill as Boit said  or wound every soul in it She drifted alongside the ship Boit and the others pushed her clear She drove to the north side of the Cove under the shade of the trees the April moonlight shone upon the shade of the trees so brightly a deep green against the silver of the waters of the Cove and the woods echoed with groans of dying Indians whose bodies were stranded on shore Boit saw canoes passing and repassing alongside the ship all night retrieving bodies
O Henriette I remember yet how cross you were over Lady C. how you hated her and detested me. Yet now you see you don't mind a bit. You've got used to it, and you feel more free. And now you know how good we were up there in the snow with Lady C. though you hated her at the first go. Yet now you can see how she set us free to laugh, and to be more spontaneous, and we were happy, weren't we up there in the snow with the world below! So now, when you say your prayers at night you must sometimes pray: Dear Lord of delight may I be Jane tonight, profane but sweet in your sight, though last night I was Mary  You said I might dear Lord of right be so contrary. So may I be  tonight, and refrain from being Mary?
When down the west the new moon slipped, A curved canoe that dipped and tipped, When from the rose the dewdrop dripped,  As if it shed its heart's blood slow; As softly silent as a star I climbed a lattice that I know, A window lattice, held ajar  By one slim hand as white as snow: The hand of her who set me here, A rose, to bloom from year to year. I, who have heard the bird of June Sing all night long beneath the moon; I, who have heard the zephyr croon  Soft music 'mid spring's avenues, Heard then a sweeter sound than these,  Among the shadows and the dews  A heart that beat like any bee's,  Sweet with a name and I know whose: Her heart that, leaning, pressed on me, A rose, she never looked to see. O star and moon! O wind and bird! Ye harkened, too, but never heard The secret sweet, the whispered word  I heard, when by her lips his name Was murmured. Then she saw me there!   But that I heard was I to blame? Whom in the darkness of her hair  She thrust since I had heard the same: Condemned within its deeps to lie, A rose, imprisoned till I die.
This is a rope of stars tied to my wrist. This is a train, pulling the feckless palmprints of the dead. It isn't enough to sing and begin again. It isn't enough to dissemble the alphabet And listen for The one heartbeat I listen for, as it comes as it goes, Keeping the world alive, My poems in a language now I finally understand, Little tablets of salt rubbed smooth by the wind. It isn't enough to transform the curlicues. (Deep water is what the albums will manifest, the light jagged then not jagged, The moon dragging her hooks Through the lakes and the river beds ...) This is a lip of snow and a lip of blood.
Let the idle caliph tie his own shoelaces for a change. Let twilight turn opaque dark pour encourager les autres. It is a hotel, Milarepa as usual was right, we check out  but those ducks we heard quacking every midnight when the last canalboat disturbed them, we'll remember them forever, life after life. Surrounded by ridiculous valises we perch in crowded European trains. Memories, not necessarily our own, beset us, we will never be free of them, whoever they really belong to. You can stumble over somebody else's suitcase as well as your own. They blur and vary, change colors, change cities, talk in tongues, but always claim me for their own. Wherever they come from they're here, snug around the heart, an incurable disease pretending to be my mind.
What a walk. First mile uphill. The road went rock to peat to mud. The final five hundred yards we floundered through lumpy swamp. Whatever we've read in old novels, it's no fun to walk in heather, and we'd have to cut this wind in half to enjoy a kiss on the moor. We believe him worth it, the legend of this loch:  Hasn't he kept us in terror all our lives? This is where he lives, in this eerie black water tucked in behind the crag that rises like a bad past between our faces and all of the afternoon sun. We know his disguises: gentleman of the evening, sheep dog, normal horse. And we know he comes to our village for no reason other than to frighten what we used to call maidens or to kill the mayor we've never been organized enough to elect. He's not drunk with power. He comes just now and then when least expected, when we enjoy an innocent picnic or go to the store. Sometimes we think we see him and don't. A dog looks wrong in certain light or one horse won't run with the others exhilarated by gales. When we see a man, white tie and tails, given our lives we know that much charm is suspect. We lock our doors when a lone hawk seems to enjoy the storm. He hasn't come for so long, today we've tracked him to his home. We had a hard time finding you. We are wet and cold. The blackface sheep resent us. The shepherd won't return our wave. With the world on its way to certain disaster, can't you reappear, rise slimy and majestic out of the loch and snort at least one minor threat to keep us in line? Or are we out of monsters? Are we now reduced to sensible conclusion like empty water, with no one more interesting than ourselves to fear? We take the long walk back, mud to peat to rock, the last mile easy downhill. Our car has never waited for us this long before. We are embarrassed by what we hold in, the hopeful and hopeless child that wants to cry  We saw him. We saw him. He is really there.
This is what polish is for: the death of a mouse In a mansion made to fit the living, Where antecedents wrinkle up their noses At the mice and the music is Aeolian. Polish is for the floor and for sharp nails, And the trap too perhaps with its absolute poetry. Not for the regiment of exploded views, Not the detail of crafted steel, not halberds Or escutcheons, the streaming merciless dead Beyond our control (victims of halberds, Escutcheons, crafted steel and exploded views). Poetry has its uses. It can lament the living, Raise up the dead, show us bright bones, Twang a heroic harp at the right moment, Spotlight the anomaly of a louse, Show nature her own image, or bury a mouse.
Move onward, Time, and bring us sooner free From this self-clouding turmoil where we ply On others' errands driven continually: O lead us to our own souls, ere we die! We toil for that we love not; thou concealest Our true loves from us; all we thirst to attain Thou darkly holdest, and alone revealest A mirror that our sighs for ever stain. Art thou so jealous of our full delight? Thou takest our strength, toil, fervour, and sweet youth; And when thou hast taken these, thou givest sight At last to see and to endure the truth. Thou art too swift to our weak steps; but oh, To our desire thou movest, Time, how slow!
The green bay-tree is flourishing. The light from its leaves drips lividly Down on a fool, who muses on fairness. A fool I was born, he says modestly. The green bay-tree thinks, I am filthy With foliage, my sap runneth over. At times I might wish to loiter palely, But money just grows on me, so to speak. A born fool, says the fool under the tree, I shall die one too. And at the last, If I am lucky, I shall have nothing But peace. Meanwhile I dream of equity. In self-knowledge we tie: but he talks and Is heard; I think and am not, thinks the tree. Indeed we shall all have peace at the last. For the present I flourish disgustingly.
Romance was always young. You come to-day Just eight years old With marvellous dark hair. Younger than Dante found you When you turned His heart into the way That found the heavenly stair. Perhaps we must be strangers. I confess My soul this hour is Dante's, And your care Should be for dolls Whose painted hands caress Your marvellous dark hair. Romance, with moonflower face And morning eyes, And lips whose thread of scarlet prophesies The canticles of a coming king unknown, Remember, when you join him On his throne, Even me, your far-off troubadour, And wear For me some trifling rose Beneath your veil, Dying a royal death, Happy and pale, Choked by the passion, The wonder and the snare, The glory and despair That still will haunt and own Your marvellous dark hair.
This is the heat that seeks the flaw in everything and loves the flaw. Nothing is heavier than its spirit, nothing more landlocked than the body within it. Its daylilies grow overnight, our lawns bare, then falsely gay, then bare again. Imagine your mind wandering without its logic, your body the sides of a riverbed giving in ... In it, no world can survive having more than its neighbors; in it, the pressure to become forever less is the pressure to take forevermore to get there. Oh let it touch you ... The porch is sharply lit little box of the body  and the hammock swings out easily over its edge. Beyond, the hot ferns bed, and fireflies gauze the fat tobacco slums, the crickets boring holes into the heat the crickets fill. Rock out into that dark and back to where the blind moths circle, circle, back and forth from the bone-white house to the creepers unbraiding. Nothing will catch you. Nothing will let you go. We call it blossoming  the spirit breaks from you and you remain.
It was in a dark forest Where one night I was lost <> <> <> <> I encountered a hooded figure Who was my other self He gave me his hand and fair words And followed me back to this city Where he has never left my side <> <> My other self, my constant companion.
Conjugations of the verb &ldquo;to be&rdquo; asleep since Adam's fall wake from bad phosphor dreams heavy with mineral desire. Earthstruck they leave their ferny prints of spines in beds of stone and carry private moons down history's long roads, gaudy with flags. The one they walk behind who's named &ldquo;I AM&rdquo; they chose with spurts of flame to guide them like the pillar of a cloud into the mind's white exile.
Neither on horesback nor seated, But like himself, squarely on two feet, The poet of death and lilacs Loafs by the footpath. Even the bronze looks alive Where it is folded like cloth. And he seems friendly. &ldquo;Where is the Mississippi panorama And the girl who played the piano? Where are you, Walt? The Open Road goes to the used-car lot. &ldquo;Where is the nation you promised? These houses built of wood sustain Colossal snows, And the light above the street is sick to death. &ldquo;As for the people see how they neglect you! Only a poet pauses to read the inscription.&rdquo; &ldquo;I am here,&rdquo; he answered. &ldquo;It seems you have found me out. Yet, did I not warn you that it was Myself I advertised? Were my words not sufficiently plain? &ldquo;I gave no prescriptions, And those who have taken my moods for prophecies Mistake the matter.&rdquo; Then, vastly amused &ldquo;Why do you reproach me? I freely confess I am wholly disreputable. Yet I am happy, because you have found me out.&rdquo; A crocodile in wrinkled metal loafing... Then all the realtors, Pickpockets, salesmen, and the actors performing Official scenarios, Turned a deaf ear, for they had contracted American dreams. But the man who keeps a store on a lonely road, And the housewife who knows she's dumb, And the earth, are relieved. All that grave weight of America Cancelled! Like Greece and Rome. The future in ruins! The castles, the prisons, the cathedrals Unbuilding, and roses Blossoming from the stones that are not there... The clouds are lifting from the high Sierras, The Bay mists clearing. And the angel in the gate, the flowering plum, Dances like Italy, imagining red.
lady you have written me a letter which i will never keep in a foolish vermilion box glad with possible dragons but in a surer place,and in a better place and in a richer(and if sometimes i will take it out,to see how it is,perhaps you will understand perhaps you will know that a million things happen richly in me.) And where i will put it away my lady you will understand,only if once (if leaning and with little breasts apart you quickly will look into the dark box of my shutting heart
Hark, I hear the bells of Westgate,  I will tell you what they sigh, Where those minarets and steeples  Prick the open Thanet sky. Happy bells of eighteen-ninety,  Bursting from your freestone tower! Recalling laurel, shrubs and privet,  Red geraniums in flower. Feet that scamper on the asphalt  Through the Borough Council grass, Till they hide inside the shelter  Bright with ironwork and glass, Striving chains of ordered children  Purple by the sea-breeze made, Striving on to prunes and suet  Past the shops on the Parade. Some with wire around their glasses,  Some with wire across their teeth, Writhing frames for running noses  And the drooping lip beneath. Church of England bells of Westgate!  On this balcony I stand, White the woodwork wriggles round me,  Clock towers rise on either hand. For me in my timber arbour  You have one more message yet, &ldquo;Plimsolls, plimsolls in the summer,  Oh goloshes in the wet!&rdquo;
Incipient, in the heat Of kitchen ranges, on August afternoons I hear it mentioned ... the destiny of the wheat Whose time is coming soon. The weighbridge Expects it ... manifold breadgrains, Winnowed souls of wheat, and lost percentages  Christ's name taken in vain. And the stone kitchens Ahead of time ... wives and stoves, Fieldworkers eating in rota, batches of loaves, Like sacraments in a religion Marx himself could approve. But sickles are shelved, Outdated as books, and what does history prove? I have to remind myself Ireland, Ireland ... untold ears Await beheading, ripen in the wind For news that no one hears Translated back from the future, until the end Crashes into gear Machinery still as death In the haggard now, the black crows take to the air And it's autumn forthwith.
There is no cock crowing in our bedroom, waking good morning startled by his cries: the great bird has vanished in a fiery dream, his clamorous wings are shut and his rolling golden eye has gone blind and his radiant comb is a laurel of ashes. Listen, there is no cock crowing (Somebody murdered someone else's wife and left a pool of blood in the subway, crying his matins out of gothic type, shouting the resurrection and the life, rising in vapors from an invisible flame, sloughing his shirt and trousers in an electric chair) There is no cock crowing, but there is a phantom bird walking through prison walls, walking through streets and houses silent, invulnerable, walking over the dead  over the martyrs and the wrongdoers there is no cock crowing.
As &lsquo;Name of individual, partnership, or corporation to whom paid&rsquo; I find my own, followed by (in brackets) &lsquo;Faust&rsquo;. The amount of income received in this capacity is &dollar;3.30 gross, From which I am glad to see no tax has been withheld. Egotist as he is One had never thought the Devil so close-fisted. He wasn't always: Gretchen Helen contributions to knowledge all that real   estate . . . What can have changed him? And yet, Goethe only lasted a couple of months after completing his   masterpiece, So I could even be said to be lucky, nearly twenty-four years  after publication, still making &dollar;3.30 out of a little crib  of the Master's epic designed for non-German-speaking  near-dropouts taking the World Literature course. None of us, it seems, even though no tax is deducted, gets much for   selling his soul. The sea took back the land, Gretchen lost her head, Helen was   incorporeal, the scholarship soon discredited; Faust died the moment he started to enjoy life; and Goethe's poetry   is supplanted by a crib  It was always a buyer's market, always.
If love hadn't made him clumsy, if he hadn't fallen forward, had never drowned in his own perfection, what would he have thought about his aging face as it altered, year after year season by season? In the old conspiracy between the eye and its reflection, love casts a primal shadow. Perhaps he would blame the wrinkling surface of the pool for what he saw or think the blemishes on his once smooth cheek were simply small fish just beneath the lethal skin of the water.
A torn body, correspondent of extreme cold. Altitude or thought, colliding as an image of moving water, time, the slip of simple life. It is matter, after all, that is corrupted, not spirit. After all, it is spirit that is corrupted not matter. The role given, mashed into protein grace. A lifted arm in shadow. A lifted thinking banging silently in the darkness. I fondle what I find of myself. Of you what I understand. Trumpets of slow weather. Love blends in season.
Take these thousand steps, these up-running shoes, the orange/red/brownstone rooftops studded like Arab faces in the sun. Take my one African eye. Take these white steps, these ladders up-growing from the green, the marble-head dome with eyes the flicking cameras of tourists, the franc rusted fountains, the postcards, the translated prayers. Take the beaded stained glass and the false night naked inside, the nuns singing, the statues looking cool, the candles leaning from light. <> <> <> <> Take the fast breathing, the up-going, the wide plane of rooftops frozen in a Paris mist. the dignity of trodden stone descending to subway sleepers, take my primitive feet danced out and still. Take the iron colored dust from  the pigeon feeders, the hundred smelling vendors, the fast hands, the begging. Take jazz in twisted TV antennas and wire clotheslines, or my lips quivering, hands watching, holding. Take this hill into the mind as you look all over Europe; your clogged ears can't hear the screaming, your pointed noses snuff out blood and urine smells, your green eyes don't see this body drop on angry gargoyles.
On the Glad Day the sheep penned themselves and offered their wool willingly. An old shearer was seen standing on an outcrop of quartz down by the &lsquo;thousand acre&rsquo; paddock. At the pub that night somebody said he'd been on fire. The old shearer denied it, saying it must have been the sunset. The sky's props popped and crackled as they struggled to hold their burden, even ghosts moved en-masse out of the mulga to witness what promised to be a holocaust. The five-pointed flower struggled to outgrow  outshine the darkest polypus: the spent tin mine they'd blocked with a few sticks of gelignite after a couple of kids had fallen in and perished the crows spreading as the heat peeled the layers of sight. Intaglioed on the silo walls the cat and its litter inflected the bloodier face of wheat: ASW, Australian Standard White. They hooted and cheered in the pub that night, washing it down straight from the tap, while in the limelight a stranger had sat, marking dust and twisting a glass, clenching a fist, wiping rust from his lips. These are only a few of the many images that came to mind as cosmonauts 999 Days and 1000 Days watched Mother Earth shade herself like a child's etch-a-sketch. The sun, caught in the child's decline refused to rise, while the larks fired between the cosmonauts' eyes, outspun the concentric layers of sight.
who sees all things as love, who sees the nature of himself. the flatness of the room, the evening spread against the windows soft. who stares quietly into the shadows listening to the moon's light dropping softly on the rug. He comes to a place, of color, where there are flowers and the wind moves them as he looks, his hands hung heavily in space. A place wherein sound is anemone, green blurred in sleep. Burned in our heads, bells thudding, paths, long empty streets. He moves without thought, or memory of it. By rote like the wind, the windows burning before the sun is immersed blind under a high thin bridge. Pure. And barely human.
Even now this landscape is assembling. The hills darken. The oxen sleep in their blue yoke, the fields having been picked clean, the sheaves bound evenly and piled at the roadside among cinquefoil, as the toothed moon rises: This is the barrenness of harvest or pestilence. And the wife leaning out the window with her hand extended, as in payment, and the seeds distinct, gold, calling <> <> And the soul creeps out of the tree.
Sylvette scrubbing, arms of a woman marbled with muscle swabbing the sill, tiny red grains like suck kisses on Sylvette's skin, Sylvette's wrists in and out of the water as often as otters. She grips that pig of a brush squirts bristle makes the soap crawl then wipes it all up.
soft rainsqualls on the swells south of the Bonins, late at night. Light from the empty mess-hall throws back bulky shadows of winch and fairlead over the slanting fantail where I stand. but for men on watch in the engine room, the man at the wheel, the lookout in the bow, the crew sleeps. in cots on deck or narrow iron bunks down drumming passageways below. the ship burns with a furnace heart steam veins and copper nerves quivers and slightly twists and always goes  easy roll of the hull and deep vibration of the turbine underfoot. bearing what all these crazed, hooked nations need: steel plates and long injections of pure oil.
she is an S sinuousladyslippering He I am He my voice goes out He heilhe heelhe stamp myself indelible my He deedsmy He doings what a wondrous work is I He Man sss sssss little bubbles of s escape rippling the mirror imperfections sssssss what is she whispering what is she hiding from he/me what isssss s ssssshe s
<> &dollar;10-plate-special-guest at Cobo Hall, by Ford Motor, by Chamber of Commerce, General Westlessland at right arm: <> <> Lions, Rotary, American Legion, Tiger Stadium sit at the dais. Ghetto mentality: no tab to credit card to mortgage to bad check made good by black businessman to college to law school to member of firm: we'll pick up tab:
Ah, could I lay me down in this long grass And close my eyes, and let the quiet wind Blow over me I am so tired, so tired Of passing pleasant places! All my life, Following Care along the dusty road, Have I looked back at loveliness and sighed; Yet at my hand an unrelenting hand Tugged ever, and I passed. All my life long Over my shoulder have I looked at peace; And now I fain would lie in this long grass And close my eyes. Yet onward! Cat-birds call Through the long afternoon, and creeks at dusk Are guttural. Whip-poor-wills wake and cry, Drawing the twilight close about their throats. Only my heart makes answer. Eager vines Go up the rocks and wait; flushed apple-trees Pause in their dance and break the ring for me; Dim, shady wood-roads, redolent of fern And bayberry, that through sweet bevies thread Of round-faced roses, pink and petulant, Look back and beckon ere they disappear. Only my heart, only my heart responds. Yet, ah, my path is sweet on either side All through the dragging day, sharp underfoot And hot, and like dead mist the dry dust hangs  But far, oh, far as passionate eye can reach, And long, ah, long as rapturous eye can cling, The world is mine: blue hill, still silver lake, Broad field, bright flower, and the long white road; A gateless garden, and an open path; My feet to follow, and my heart to hold.
Now they are resting in the fleckless light separately in unison like the sacks of sifted stone stacked regularly by twos about the flat roof ready after lunch to be opened and strewn The copper in eight foot strips has been beaten lengthwise down the center at right angles and lies ready to edge the coping One still chewing picks up a copper strip and runs his eye along it
My wife and I lived all alone, contention was our only bone. I fought with her, she fought with me, and things went on right merrily. But now I live here by myself with hardly a damn thing on the shelf, and pass my days with little cheer since I have parted from my dear. Oh come home soon, I write to her. Go fuck yourself, is her answer. Now what is that, for Christian word? I hope she feeds on dried goose turd. But still I love her, yes I do. I love her and the children too. I only think it fit that she should quickly come right back to me. Ah no, she says, and she is tough, and smacks me down with her rebuff. Ah no, she says, I will not come after the bloody things you've done. Oh wife, oh wife I tell you true, I never loved no one but you. I never will, it cannot be another woman is for me. That may be right, she will say then, but as for me, there's other men. And I will tell you I propose to catch them firmly by the nose. And I will wear what dresses I choose! And I will dance, and what's to lose! I'm free of you, you little prick, and I'm the one can make it stick. Was this the darling I did love? Was this that mercy from above did open violets in the spring  and made my own worn self to sing? She was. I know. And she is still, and if I love her? then so I will. And I will tell her, and tell her right ... Oh lovely lady, morning or evening or afternoon. Oh lovely lady, eating with or without a spoon. Oh most lovely lady, whether dressed or undressed or partly. Oh most lovely lady, getting up or going to bed or sitting only. Oh loveliest of ladies, than whom none is more fair, more gracious, more beautiful. Oh loveliest of ladies, whether you are just or unjust, merciful, indifferent, or cruel. Oh most loveliest of ladies, doing whatever, seeing whatever, being whatever. Oh most loveliest of ladies, in rain, in shine, in any weather. Oh lady, grant me time, please, to finish my rhyme.
Different in persons Diverse in minds Friends in understanding Exiles in self Antagonists in egotism Brothers in being Enemies in greed Dull in routine Lovers in beauty Separate in bodies Many in desires One in ultimate reality Strangers on the earth Prisoners in this world Natives of deity
Up late again, I sit on the toilet flicking your night-light on and off in the little pink bathroom under the stairs. I am writing on the little scraps of paper you left by the phone. We do not use the night-lights you left to dot these halls. We are taking care of your old house. Last week we bought a bedroom set from an old widow moving in with her brother. Cherry wood. Maybe you know her? Mrs. Santoro. A scapular hung over the bedpost  it must have been her husband's. I gently lifted it, draped it over a stack of boxes. I wanted to put that scapular on. Can you understand that? I wanted to drape it over my neck and say a few prayers for him, for you, for old people everywhere selling off their goods. Are you done with the treatments, has your hair grown back in? Will it ever? I worship everywhere. In the kitchen I pray to the vase you left, the ceramic woman's head. Her earrings have dropped off. I have made her a pair of sunglasses and taped them on so she will not see us scuff your floors. Sometimes we still come across a note you left us instructions for the stove, the furnace, the floodlights, the locks. I heard how the gypsies robbed you when you let them use your phone. But that's not why you sold this for a prayer. The absence of your grandfather clock ticks in the hallway. You called to ask for the catalogs you use to shop. We'd thrown them out. We are young and small in this big house but we will fill it up with our dust and sins. In this tiny room under the stairs I flick off the light and step out into the dark hall, feeling my way. It is time again to dump the bag of keys you left, to finger your old bones.
This body that has fastened Itself to the wanderer Who hastens with mysterious Balked purposes, These hands that answer, This face that turns At the calling Of the name That I am wearing Like one shoe  How did I come In all this gear Among so few Clues to where I've come from Or where I am to go?
She was a year younger than I, twenty-three when she left Korea. Did she simply close the door of her father's house and walk away. And was it a long way through the tailor shops of Pusan to the wharf where the boat waited to take her to an island whose name she had only recently learned, on whose shore a man waited, turning her photograph to the light when the lanterns in the camp outside Waialua Sugar Mill were lit and the inside of his room grew luminous from the wings of moths migrating out of the cane stalks? What things did my grandmother take with her? And when she arrived to look into the face of the stranger who was her husband, thirteen years older than she, did she politely untie the silk bow of her jacket, her tent-shaped dress filling with the dry wind that blew from the surrounding fields where the men were burning the cane?
Sweet beast whose horns mourn lost amenities, mystic lament it appropriates, mad but won't say. Sings out of the side of its mouth. Between sips from a glass of rum, second sight. Growled as we began to ignite, reassemble ... Propped on what were said to've once been legs, got up and walked
That crude little old logcabin Where I was born What it now Playgro'n' for heh-hehing rabbin And little wild chickerbug That crude little Old logcabin where my gramppap's born What it come to Buryin'gro'n' for stiff-neckin' gruntyhog And little ornery chasserbear That crude Little old logcabin of m'greatgrampy What The hell it doin' Meetin'gro'n' for fancy-kickin' societybig And little Sneerin' lace-overalled pipsquirt They was home t'us all
I hang from the horn of the crescent moon To watch the sun out-ride. He's a-riding o' the boundries By creation's t'other side. I left myself a-weeping For a love that would not smile. My soul hath rode a-hunting With the star dogs for a while. I hang from the horn of the crescent moon To watch the hunt out-ride. There rings shrill cry and horning From creation's t'other side. My soul hath caught the sun out-riding By creation's t'other side. The sun hath kissed her lips out-right And hath my soul to bride.
Ah! not now, when desire burns, and the wind calls,  and the suns of spring Light-foot dance in the woods, whisper of life, woo  me to wayfaring: Ah! not now should you come, now when the road  beckons, and good friends call, Where are songs to be sung, fights to be fought, yea!  and the best of all, Love, on myriad lips fairer than yours, kisses you  could not give! ... Dearest, why should I mourn, whimper, and whine,  I that have yet to live? Sorrow will I forget, tears for the best, love on the  lips of you, Now, when dawn in the blood wakes, and the sun  laughs up the eastern blue; I'll forget and be glad!   Only at length, dear, when the great day ends, When love dies with the last light, and the last song  has been sung, and friends All are perished, and gloom strides on the heaven:  then, as alone I lie, 'Mid Death's gathering winds, frightened and dumb,  sick for the past, may I Feel you suddenly there, cool at my brow; then may  I hear the peace Of your voice at the last, whispering love, calling, ere  all can cease In the silence of death; then may I see dimly, and  know, a space, Bending over me, last light in the dark, once, as of old,  your face.
Dry walls through second-growth Meeting at scruffy angles, And the stooped fitted death Of the mason unrenounced Where brush from three tracts mingles Man-high. A new road clears The granite outcrop, houses Follow. And now I hear it: Measure that has advanced Sure as the pulse's ferret Through flesh, stone for the city, And how that cadence fills With dust spun from the body Which, dragged around high walls, Inscribed a bitter plighting. And picnickers sit aptly Among the graves. Horns grating At an intersection spill As if to mesh remotely With the lark's gapped music On an ancient scale.
With eyes at the back of our heads we see a mountain not obstructed with woods but laced here and there with feathery groves. The doors before us in a fa&ccedil;ade that perhaps has no house in back of it are too narrow, and one is set high with no doorsill. The architect sees the imperfect proposition and turns eagerly to the knitter. Set it to rights! The knitter begins to knit. For we want to enter the house, if there is a house, to pass through the doors at least into whatever lies beyond them, we want to enter the arms of the knitted garment. As one is re-formed, so the other, in proportion. When the doors widen when the sleeves admit us the way to the mountain will clear, the mountain we see with eyes at the back of our heads, mountain green, mountain cut of limestone, echoing with hidden rivers, mountain of short grass and subtle shadows.
I know I might have lived in such a way As to have suffered only pain: Loving not man nor dog; Not money, even; feeling Toothache perhaps, but never more than an hour away From skill and novocaine; Making no contacts, dealing with life through agents, drinking one cocktail, betting two dollars, wearing raincoats in the rain; Betrayed at length by no one but the fog Whispering to the wing of the plane. &ldquo;Fountain,&rdquo; I have cried to that unbubbling well, &ldquo;I will not drink of thy water!&rdquo; Yet I thirst For a mouthful of not to swallow, only to rinse my mouth in  peace. And while the eyes of the past condemn, The eyes of the present narrow into assignation. And ... worst ... The young are so old, they are born with their fingers crossed; I shall get no help from them.
And the terrible Pang of the heart unhinged, Bereft of its sources. Out of the smashed Light; out of the hard Unmalleable, abstract Ferocity of the streets; Out of the depraved Human face, horribly Emptied of its beatitude  I behold. I behold. I behold the vision of felicity And the insuperable human grace. As one who after mindless torment Sees surcease in the smile of gratitude, The plenitude of peace. Give me my love! This cry, this cruciform. Give me back the beauty! Give me my ache of love Out of this emptiness! From the belled Hell, from the brass Inferno: Give me the center back Of my soul!
<>  Over the hush of the hills, Mounts ever a song that never stops,  A voice that never stills. Epic-loud as the sea is,  Lyric-low as the dew, It sings and sings a soul into things  And builds the world anew. Dauntless, deathless, stern but kind,  Bold and free and strong, It sweeps with mastery man's mind,  And rolls the world along. From soul to soul it wings its words,  And, lo, the darkness flies; And all who heed that song of songs  View Earth with other eyes. New eyes, new thoughts, that shall go on  Seeing as Beauty sings, Until the light of the farthest dawn  Shall fold its rainbow wings.
Forgive me if I say I love you: the powerful are always lied to since the weak are always driven by panic. I cannot love what I can't conceive, and you disclose virtually nothing: are you like the hawthorn tree, always the same thing in the same place, or are you more the foxglove, inconsistent, first springing up a pink spike on the slope behind the daisies, and the next year, purple in the rose garden? You must see it is useless to us, this silence that promotes belief you must be all things, the foxglove and the hawthorn tree, the vulnerable rose and tough daisy we are left to think you couldn't possibly exist. Is this what you mean us to think, does this explain the silence of the morning, the crickets not yet rubbing their wings, the cats not fighting in the yard?
The burros are all heehawed out The rum is gone and our friends with it  24 hours of pure loneliness explained and joked and glanced away The stars are out barking with the dogs but flowers trees cornstalks and tomato plants are fast asleep, chilled down in mist We walk into town and argue and stare at our cousins and nephews languishing in produce stalls or under streetlamps in door- ways and on the edges of taxi seats Children play pinball and jockey machines, their mothers and fathers clinking pesos together late in the 20th Century mestizo night We retreat to our lookout laid in the hills with green invisibleness at this hour, down our aspirin and vitamins B and C and walk around the fireplace filled with wet wood, newspaper and the dry hopes of the ages With the aid of kerosene, soon there is smoke rising up the chimney like light from the village plaza below, reaching our window with a choo-choo warmth as though there were no such thing as Mexico or America, only the lonely, naked spirits of people shooting out of eyes and flesh, rambling up these old mountains and back down again
He bore himself, or the self he had was borne, through great indignities and darkness inviolate in a glass braced with silver. It was as small as that. In Lithuania, spars and foul fabrics prised out of black silt with a frozen crack; elsewhere, excrements rolled in sand; scattered all across the back of beyond, seedy nobility, mincing and cheating, and getting cut to pieces. As often as he set forth, he would find himself returning through strange farmlands in incomprehensible weather. Risen by weaving works to this abstraction: something at the same time rich and dry about that trade, a station on the road to pure money; stretching resources till the patterns glow. Even in the pools and vats, even in the steamy swags and folds and leaf-stinks stuck in the nose at night there's always been someone's white finger waving above it all. Base yourself on these, Lords. I have slipped the carpet in under your foot, the cushion beneath your buttocks; the walls are all taken care of. It is with this sort of confidence you can look me in the eye. Slow cooking in a world on the move. The hours are slow, the pies live a long time; cooling and warming, they ride the bacterial dumb-waiter. A cook goes in and out of focus many times as he learns. On the bright side, the ulcer's almost forgettable, and the flies loose in the shop don't irritate, being mostly middle-sized and black, and in no hurry.
When the moment is over  the light we have turned inward the way as children we press a flashlight into our own flesh making each limb seem to smolder  when that light goes off we are saved once more by dailiness: the sun has continued its unbroken journey; the sheets may need smoothing as the forehead needs smoothing after fever. What we have learned we continue to learn as we continually memorize objects deep in our pockets: the key to a certain door; a coin whose severe face is worn to a smile. And we listen for echoes from the buried chambers of the heart whose messages are tapped out in unbreakable code, whose fires are stoked secretly even as we sleep.
<> O mooney moon, yellow half moon, Up over the green pines and gray elms, Up in the new blue. Streel, streel, White lacey mist sheets of cloud, Streel in the blowing of the wind, Streel over the blue-and-moon sky, Yellow gold half moon. It is light On the snow; it is dark on the snow, Streel, O lacey thin sheets, up in the new blue. Come down, stay there, move on. I want you, I don't, keep all. There is no song to your singing. I am hit deep, you drive far, O mooney yellow half moon, Steady, steady; or will you tip over? Or will the wind and the streeling Thin sheets only pass and move on And leave you alone and lovely? I want you, I don't, come down, Stay there, move on. Money is nothing now, even if I had it.
The mouse crawled through it, the snake after him and you're next. Did you think because Socrates went through and Saint Francis it was going to be bigger? They also squeezed every hope into its least possibility, shedding layer after layer to slide, tongue flicking, into the rank darkness. O yes, the self is that small.
Halfway through Illinois on the radio they are giving away jackpots. I can hear them squeal as they win. Luck in this landscape lies flat as if to enter the ground and add to it as well. You can see its traces, milkweed caught in the fences, the sheen on the new grass that could be sunshine or white paint. But the brushstroke is visible. We wouldn't believe anything we saw without it  the brown, the green, the rectangle, the overpass. I believe now that sorrow is our presence in this by default. In a little while I hope there will be shadows, the houses and these trees trying to bury half of themselves. <> the day the roof is put on the house, and the willows once again resemble trees, and the bridge falls in, making the river once again sufficiently hard to cross.
Those famous men of old, the Ogres  They had long beards and stinking arm-pits, They were wide-mouthed, long-yarded and great-bellied Yet not of taller stature, Sirs, than you. They lived on Ogre-Strand, which was no place But the churl's terror of their vast extent, Where every foot was three-and-thirty inches And every penny bought a whole hog. Now of their company none survive, not one, The times being, thank God, unfavourable To all but nightmare shadows of their fame; Their images stand howling on the hill (The winds enforced against those wide mouths), Whose granite haunches country-folk salute With May Day kisses, and whose knobbed knees. So many feats they did to admiration: With their enormous throats they sang louder Than ten cathedral choirs, with their grand yards Stormed the most rare and obstinate maidenheads, With their strong-gutted and capacious bellies Digested stones and glass like ostriches. They dug great pits and heaped huge mounds, Deflected rivers, wrestled with the bear And hammered judgements for posterity  For the sweet-cupid-lipped and tassel-yarded Delicate-stomached dwellers In Pygmy Alley, where with brooding on them A foot is shrunk to seven inches And twelve-pence will not buy a spare rib. And who would judge between Ogres and Pygmies  The thundering text, the snivelling commentary  Reading between such covers he will marvel How his own members bloat and shrink again.
Now that the midday heat doth scorch my shame With lightning of fond lust, I will retire Under this vine whose arms with wandering spire Do climb upon the Cross, and on the same Devise a cool repose from lawless flame, Whose leaves are intertwist with love entire, That envy's eye cannot transfuse her fire, But is rebated on the shady frame; And youthful vigour from the leaved tier, Doth stream upon my soul a new desire. List, list, the ditties of sublimed fame, Which in the closet of those leaves the choir Of heavenly birds do warble to his name. O where was I that was not where I am?
The joy of the rowan is to redden. The foxglove achieves the violence of its climb. This summer gale flattens the flower  and deforms the tree. The dog trots at a queerer angle  to the disused railway. The tabby seizes the fledgling blown to the midden. From the river, gaseous with weed, a reek of decay. Hot winds bring on hard rain, and here in Durham  a downpour tonight will probably allay whatever has got the willows by the hair, shoving light under their leaves  like an indecent surgeon. Now light's in every particle of air, acetylene wind that blows too hard and clear. Who sifts the saving from the killing terrors,  O my dear?
Whatever he had done was not quite right. The Masters never failed, however weak, To know when they had sinned against the light. Can their example purify his sight? Ought he to practise Yoga, study Greek, Or bluff his way throughout with brazen cheek? Beginning with a foolish love affair After common school and rotten college, He had the patient will but not the flair To climb with quick assault the envied stair; Messed around instead with useless knowledge, And staked on politics a fatal pledge. His marriage was the worst mistake of all. Although he loved his children when they came, He spoilt them too with just that extra doll, Or discipline which drove them to the wall. His wife and changing servants did the same  A man is damned in that domestic game. He worked at various jobs and then he stopped For reasons never clear or quite approved By those who knew; some almost said he shopped Around for dreams and projects later dropped (Though this was quite untrue); he never moved Unless he found something he might have loved. He came to me and this is what I said: &lsquo;The pattern will remain, unless you break It with a sudden jerk; but use your head ... Not all returned as heroes who had fled In wanting both to have and eat the cake. Not all who fail are counted with the fake.
is speaking it peltsis moving by itself against the windowsit proceeds of its and on the roofown accord in the nightthe writer of the poem it makes thousandshas no idea where of little wordsit will lead him which confuse the childhe cannot control it who does not understandbecause it has such a languageits own life what is the rainseparate from his own trying to tell himwhat if it carries him off should he be afraidfrom his safe life is there a messagefrom his accustomed loves of danger to be escapedshould he fear harm or can he be lulledfrom the poem and tear up by the sound of the rainthe page or simply put it and go back to sleep?aside and go back to sleep
Afternoon lengthens like sunlight also shrinking as the day comes to its end in the flickering light. The leaves make it like that, the wind moves them, the trees tower so high above the room's space. I had walked into a wall, not through but against it, felt my shoulder hit its literal hardness. Sunday. Nothing to worship but myself, my own body and those related my wife, my children, my friends  but outside, light, it grows long, lengthens. This world of such changes, nothing stable but in that motion. Oh spaces. Dance. Make happiness. Make the simple the changing  a little ode to much hopefulness.
[After the alert the hosts of the remnant premembered their future again &amp; huddled violently in towards that rhythm of perception or time of their minds which from the beginning had been their City, demonstration of their function set up in a level plain. A shadow it threw down almost to the shores of the lake where the custodians of civic pleasure wearing long sheer dresses like apsarases controlled the shimmering early summer rain. There the fruit trees were, &amp; rowboats docked in rows of blue &amp; green, some few out on the lake where women &amp; consorts fished for reflections. Not an easy time. The war had come &amp; gone &amp; come again &amp; would not certainly go away. From dawn to twilight, Workers were busy at the Catalogue, ordering, ordering, while the few who were chosen Legates of the Day went out slantwise from their perceptions into the unseen world. Trembling notebooks. They hurried home &amp; wrote down what they could too fast, too completely, their hands terrified of manumission. It all could be forgotten &amp; their work done  but the world would go with them, the City they could never betray would crumple back to an ordinary convolution in the cerebrum, locked in the calvarium, the prisonhouse.] Unseen, not missed by our slavemasters, we have gathered by this simple lake because traditions tell us it is holy. That is a pious &amp; reasonable persuasion but it will not help us. We have written what can be written, spoken what we have heard speaking in the immense spaces we mistake for our minds. Up now, into the forgetful air that thinks itself a condition or grace but is only the wind of our passage. Tantra is deed: a song in action which premembers &amp; constitutes anew the structures of void where to meet is the same as no meeting &amp; the joy of the lake is not different from the Catalogue &amp; the hand is not different from what it writes down &amp; the war goes out like a candle in an empty house.
nite) thatthis crou ched moangrowl-&amp;-thin g stirs(m id)a life whats wh (un)ich(cur ling)s ilentl y are(mi dnite also conce als 2 ph antoms clutch ed in a writhewho room)as hows of whi ne climbscr e AM e xploding aRe(n't
In a quiet moment we pause to contemplate the things that make us discontent. If all is still a moment longer than we had expected, we want to believe that this is it. This is what we have been looking for in life. Here is its goodness. This is life at last as we had expected it to be. We make fools of ourselves with speeches and optimism, and go forth out of our quiet cells to be upset again, and to curse life. The peace and silence of the lake are fooling me too, making me believe that life is sweet. Don't you know that it is only a pause? Out of sourness you must make your bread. Your trouble shall become sweet with use, and all bitterness will turn into a theme for love.
And what about those who accuse you of wallowing in it? How long for a son? How long for a mother? Thoreau to Emerson, a few days after little Waldo's death: &ldquo;You should mourn no more than for a sere leaf.&rdquo; Is not death a part of nature and all that? And over the beached body of Margaret Fuller while he held a plucked pearl button from her blouse he asserted quite sincerely that only his own dreams were of interest. We all have friends like Thoreau, and Emerson said he would as soon put his hand on an elm's bough as take the arm of that friend. We all have friends who are elm boughs, rough branches, half or three-quarters dead, who are cold-blooded with no grief of their own, hence none to clutter their days. And their judgements should thus be light as dust, as ash upon us.
His animal is finally a kind of ape after all and not an elephant, a release for him, but more than that for the two exhausted beasts. For years he struggled between them and it was either the violence of the one or the obscurity of the other, either way, as it seemed to him then, a concealment, but now that the choice was made they could move back into a simple relationship with him, and with each other. What is amazing is the choice itself. You would expect him to move from elephants into owls or into the seal-like creatures or into pelicans, or at least if he had to go back back now into hares  or shrews and weasels, if what he needed was viciousness. At least you would never expect him to choose the ape again, not after three hundred years of greed and malice, but what he was after was not the choosing of new animals but another collaboration with the old ones, and for this purpose the ape now more than the elephant would suit his fever, or what there was left of it. I remember sitting and talking for hours about the elephant. I remember the room trembling with belief and I hesitate, out of loyalty, to do any harm to that beast. But it is he who will be free at last of  and able to graze, and able to panic, without my interference. The ape is different it will be years before he is free: in the meantime, when we rise we will rise for each other and when we howl it will be in each other's faces. There is nothing degrading or cynical in this. We had to go back again for the sake of all three. Otherwise we would mix our disgust forever with our dream. What the ape does is separate once and for all the one from the other. What he does is illuminate the distance. What he does is make it bearable. The leaves sticking out of his mouth, the puffed-out belly, the dirt on his lips, this I pity; the muzzled face, the musk-like odor, this I pity. I lived and I lived constantly on the verge of a true destruction. Because of these animals I was able to break away. I am in their debt.
he said, turning, unconscious of emphasis, why goddamn it I was almost a gangster! Could shoot straight. That's it. So at morning, coming alone and walking five miles, he could see the horns and waited. Looking. Until it was all there. He fired. Simple? How simple? To say what's what takes how much? Three cans in a row, from the hip yet. No joke. But to worry, to think of it that way (the gangster)  to see yourself like others see you, Jesus, what pride! Quieter, a wife and two children, he'll wait for a reckoning.
Composed by nature, time, human art, an earthly paradise. A haze that is not smog gentles the light. Mountains delicately frosted, timbered autumnal hillsides copper and bronze. Black-green of pine, gray-green of olive. Nothing is missing. Ferries' long wakes pattern the water, send to still shores a minor music of waves. Dark perpendiculars of cypress, grouped or single, cross immemorial horizontals of terraced slopes, the outstretched wings, creamy yellow, of villas more elegant in slight disrepair than anything spick and span ever could be. And all perceived not through our own crude gaze alone but by the accretion of others' vision language, paint, memory transmitted. Here, just now, the malady we know the earth endures seems in remission  or  But only seems. Down by the lake the sign: &ldquo;Swim at your own risk. The lake is polluted.&rdquo; <> We can avoid looking that way, if we choose. That's at our own risk. Deep underneath remission's fragile peace, the misshaped cells remain.
<> &lsquo;And the young man's dog went with them.&rsquo;  Name Not told us  &lsquo;So they went their way &lsquo;And the dog went after them.&rsquo; That's all; Not a word of breed or build, Coat, colour, age, sex anything! Had I but lived in Nineveh And met them on the road! Some night, Unless my dreams give out. ... &lsquo;Oh, Sirs, &lsquo;Pray pardon me&rsquo;
Here is a tale for ladies with romances: There was an owl; composer and musician, Who looked as wise as if he had a mission, And at all art cast supercilious glances. People proclaimed him great because  And, like the great, he never played, nor printed His compositions, 'though 'twas whispered, hinted He'd written something but no one had read it. Owl-eyed he posed at functions of position, Hirsute, and eye-glassed, looking analytic, Opening his mouth to worshipping female knowledge: And then he married. A woman of ambition. A singer, teacher, and a musical critic. Just what he wanted. He became a college.
&ldquo;What of the old love?&rdquo; cries my heart to me; Ah let it die, I say; ah let it die. Burdened it was with love's satiety, Weep for it, heart, and give it sigh for sigh. Keep but its purity to give the new, Shed all the dross its sorrowed years had borne; Keep but its joy to cheer the journey thru, Dry all the tears that cloud my new love's morn. Give me the passion that the old love brought, Add to the measure of my new love's fire; Give me the laughter that the old love wrought, Add to the wealth of my new love's desire. What is the old but treasure for the new, Found in love's bounty of the good and true?
He closed the deal on the night. A real bargain, he said. And the city was reduced to a room, the man's constant body in bed, the sheets glowing like phosphorus. One flaw in the design made it possible for an occasional body to slip in. The sheets would glow a bit more brightly in its presence. Each time it left, the body would leave more of itself behind, until there was no absence to speak of. The man began to count on the occasional body and its lingering presence, which he now calls <> of necessity draw their own conclusions. Even night is a product of residual light. What they call absolute darkness is the art of knowing how to lower the shades almost completely, knowing exactly how much is enough. We measure the varying degrees of shadow in the residue. We know that a shadow is the object from which it is cast. We are beginning to understand the principle. Night, we have finally admitted, cannot extend beyond the things it evokes. The concept of night as entity is impossible. The varying degrees of light in each shadow speak for the silence between the stars. I apologize for my dialogues with the light. I apologize for the voices in the red hibiscus. I apologize for the small details still discernible in the sparse grass of the yard. I apologize for the birds that would not nest in the absent dark of the tree, for the long evenings, and the square of sun on the bark of the tree, and the promise that prevented the last hours. I apologize for the leaves moving like carbon copies of leaves across your face.
Clear gentle air over Jesse James &amp; male friendships &amp; womanless feats of the Heraclids whereas the soft sky this morning is bright just behind where some flowers like peonies grow in shade in the shade of a house. Why dont they come in who have played all night at treason &amp; its opposite triumphs of pecking order &amp; catastrophes of reason gun bomb &amp; bank a woman only an accomplishment why dont you come in The Heroic silences itself in a bullet the Hero resembles a door capable of extreme positions without change of location. I would were a flower to which you might turn, a woman in bed to you in your anger. A knock on the door &amp; your body doesnt mean anything anymore.
Either He is fatigued  Creation takes it out of you And this is the sixth day  Or else He is having second thoughts. (But God's first are always right.) Adam has no thoughts at the moment, Only a certain bewilderment: It was all so sudden, There's no substitute for a leisurely womb. He hardly seems a sufficient abyss To be so intensely brooded over. How can he hope to live up to it? The serpent is already coiled about him. Surely a premature appearance? (Though no surprise to the Omniscient.) Heretics would say later, it was life Snaking out of Adam's right foot  As if He'd left a hole in it! Or perhaps intended, Eve as yet undreamt of, For a household pet. Snakes have clean habits. Prudently God provides Adam with ribs in plenty: No need to start from scratch next time. &lsquo;I must create a system,&rsquo; He is thinking, &lsquo;And leave the rest to them ...&rsquo; The snake is whispering about a thing called &lsquo;sex&rsquo;, Though what it is he doesn't know from Adam. Can that be meant to be a sunset  Louring and chaotic? It doesn't look natural, Not exactly the shepherd's delight. Next there would have to be a Shepherd. That's the trouble with creating, There's no end to it.
She takes off her run-over shoes. She removes her re-run stockings. She unzips her re-hemmed skirt. She parts with her polyester blouse. She lies down on the sagging couch. Husband and children hide in the living room dark. The television glow slides over her slip Like moonlight. Nat King Cole's glossed hair glistens like an onyx. His voice shines in her eyes. She closes them. His song ends on the edges of her Mona Lisa smile. Midnight sighs over the silence of sleeping children. She sleeps on and on the sagging couch. Until husband invites her to his bed, His voice newly tender, newly televised.
It was all the clods at once become precious; it was the barn, and the shed, and the windmill, my hands, the crack Arlie made in the ax handle: oh, let me stay here humbly, forgotten, to rejoice in it all; let the sun casually rise and set. If I have not found the right place, teach me; for somewhere inside, the clods are vaulted mansions, lines through the barn sing for the saints forever, the shed and windmill rear so glorious the sun shudders like a gong. Now I know why people worship, carry around magic emblems, wake up talking dreams they teach to their children: the world speaks. The world speaks everything to us. It is our only friend.
Come! look in the shadowy water here, The stagnant water of Ashly Mere: Where the stirless depths are dark but clear,  What is the thing that lies there?  A lily-pod, half-sunk from sight? Or spawn of the toad, all water-white? Or ashen blur of the moon's wan light?  Or a woman's face and eyes there? Now lean to the water a listening ear, The haunted water of Ashly Mere: What is the sound that you seem to hear  In the ghostly hush of the deeps there?  A withered reed, that the ripple lips? Or a night-bird's wing, that the surface whips? Or the rain in a leaf that drips and drips?  Or a woman's voice that weeps there? Now look and listen! but not too near The lonely water of Ashly Mere!  For so it happens this time each year  As you lean by the Mere and listen: And the moaning voice I understand,  For oft I have watched it draw to land, And lift from the water a ghastly hand  And a face whose dead eyes glisten. And this is the reason why every year To the hideous water of Ashly Mere I come when the woodland leaves are sear,  And the autumn moon hangs hoary: For here by the Mere was wrought a wrong But the old, old story is overlong  And woman is weak and man is strong,  And the Mere's and mine is the story.
<> Carried you over the garden wall, What a wonder it was that anyone found you Who scarcely had opened at all. Damp earth and dead leaves strewn thick about you, How could such a fragile thing grow So straight and unstunted, so shining and slender! Will anyone ever know? So little you asked for, a corner of quiet, A glimpse of sun and a patch of sky, A flash of wings in the gray of morning From some bird passing by. A corner of quiet by moss-stained maples Tucked in under the garden wall; What a pity the wind must whip down on you Before it was yours at all!
Whoever it was put nowhere on the map as a place to visit or plan to visit or have a streetplan of, was losing heart. He had considered every means of transport, air-routes and sea-routes, and found them wanting. And every road he chose led back to Rome, a Rome not quite the same Rome as before, where senators barked from curtained litters, but still bleeding the provinces and setting fire to anywhere that failed to pay its tribute or didn't heap its trays with fruit and meat or tried to cut loose from the coils of law. And nowhere was that place just out of reach of Caesar's wrath, where no one is bled dry and bread is broken for each one to eat.
Just notes really. Profit is unpaid wages The girls cried. Redraft the sand. his shadow on the sand? There is a new sign, a footpath sign.  Elizabeth holds up a cassette, spools it out. &lsquo;I'm bandaging the moon.&rsquo;  A Conservative landrover with a flag flying roaring through the streets of Alnwick. Three A.M. The foghorn. The day, redrafting itself. How do you paint te
To get to Tokyo from Istanbul, it's fun to travel when the weather's cool. To reach Madrid by way of Edinburgh, it might be best to leave from Glockamorra. The Shangri-La you dream about comes close to meeting mute desire an Ivory Coast, the Gold Coast of the past, fountains of youth. All colonies project like light from booths in darkened rooms of mind; a picture forms and moves and moves again and spills and warms spaces between the heartbeat and held breath. The distance anywhere from birth to death, from sit to stand, from heat to holy snow  invents itself, unravels as you go.
<>  Forgive me if I say we must; Must make again exchange of heart,  But never more exchange of trust. With faces cold and stern must meet,  While inward fires consume our souls, Must pass as strangers in the street,  While o'er our hope the death bell tolls. We met but a short while ago,  And all my sky was clouded o'er; You loved, and scattered all my woe,  Loved as I ne'er was loved before. You taught my hungry heart to hope,  And filled love's chalice to the brim, But hope must now in darkness grope,  And love's sweet sunshine e'er be dim. When eventide has wrapped the world  In garments of a silvery sheen, And diamond studded skies unfurled  Their beauty fair to deek the Queen Of night, as she shall joyous ride  In magic splendor on her way, Like modest, sweet and happy bride,  All glorious in her perfect sway. My thoughts unfettered fly to thee, Untramelled by my heart's deep woe, Though all our actions guarded be,  Love's tender voice still murmurs low, And fans the embers into flame,  My heart thrills with its ecstasy At any mention of thy name;  Forgets, and longs to be with thee. Yet we must smile and kiss the rod  That strikes the blow and severs us, Must fix our hope on heaven and God,  Earth's joys are ever severed thus. Farewell, and though we parted be, And parting brings us bitter pain, Some day we shall united be, For we must hope to live again. When all our wrongs have righted been,  And crooked paths have been made straight, When from our joys shall drop the screen,  Which now is hung by cruel fate, When the full craving of each heart  Is granted, we shall happy be When meeting we shall no more part,  In the blissful realm eternity.
A faint, sickening scent of irises Persists all morning. Here in a jar on the table A fine proud spike of purple irises Rising up in the class-room litter, makes me unable To see the class's lifted and bended faces Save in a broken pattern, amid purple and gold and sable. I can smell the bog-end, gorgeous in its breathless Dazzle of may-blobs, where the marigold glare overcast you With fire on your cheeks and your brow and your chin as you dipped Your face in the marigold bunch, to touch and contrast you, Your own dark mouth with the bridal faint lady-smocks, And the kingcups' glisten, that shall long outlast you. You amid the bog-end's yellow incantation, You sitting in the cowslips of the meadow above, Me, your shadow on the bog-flame flowery may-blobs, Me full length in the cowslips, muttering you love; You, your soul like a lady-smock, lost, evanescent, You with your face all rich, like the sheen on a dove! You are always asking, do I remember, remember The buttercup bog-end where the flowers rose up And glazed you over with a sheen of gold? You ask me, do the healing days close up The gulf that came between us, and drew us in? Do they wipe away the gloom the gulf throws up? You upon the dry, dead beech-leaves, once more, only once Taken like a sacrifice, in the night invisible; Only the darkness, and the scent of you!  And yes, thank God, it still is possible The healing days shall close the dark gulf up Wherein we fainted like a smoke or dew! Like vapour, dew, or poison! Now, thank God The last year's fire is gone, and your face is ash; And the gulf that came between you, woman, and me, man, That day, is half grown over, it need not abash Either of us any more; henceforth we can Forget each other and the bruise of our bodies' clash.
The Sandman walks abroad tonight, With his canvas sack o' dreams filled tight. Over the roofs of the little town, The golden face of the moon looks down. Each Mary and Willy and Cora and Ned Is sound asleep in some cozy bed, When the Sandman opens his magic sack To select the dreams from his wonder pack. &ldquo;Ah,&rdquo; says the Sandman, &ldquo;To this little girl I'll send a dream like a precious pearl.&rdquo; So to Mary Jane, who's been good all day, A fairy comes in her sleep to play; But for Corinne Ann, who teased the cat, There's a horrid dream of a horrid rat, And the greedy boy, with his stomach too full, Has a bad, bad dream of a raging bull; While for tiny babes, a few days old, Come misty dreams, all rose and gold. And for every girl and every boy The Sandman has dreams that can please or annoy. When at pink-white dawn, with his night's work done, He takes the road toward the rising sun, He goes straight on without a pause To his house in the land of Santa Claus. But at purple night-fall he's back again To distribute his dreams, be it moon light or rain; And good little children get lovely sleep toys, But woe to the bad little girls and boys! For those who'd have dreams that are charming and sweet, Must be good in the day and not stuff when they eat, 'Cause old Mister Sandman, abroad each night, Has a dream in his sack to fit each child just right.
If you should look for this place after a handful of lifetimes: Perhaps of my planted forest a few May stand yet, dark-leaved Australians or the coast cypress, haggard With storm-drift; but fire and the axe are devils. Look for foundations of sea-worn granite, my fingers had the art To make stone love stone, you will find some remnant. But if you should look in your idleness after ten thousand years: It is the granite knoll on the granite And lava tongue in the midst of the bay, by the mouth of the Carmel River-valley, these four will remain In the change of names. You will know it by the wild sea-fragrance of wind Though the ocean may have climbed or retired a little; You will know it by the valley inland that our sun and our moon were born from Before the poles changed; and Orion in December Evenings was strung in the throat of the valley like a lamp-lighted bridge. Come in the morning you will see white gulls Weaving a dance over blue water, the wane of the moon Their dance-companion, a ghost walking By daylight, but wider and whiter than any bird in the world. My ghost you needn't look for; it is probably Here, but a dark one, deep in the granite, not dancing on wind With the mad wings and the day moon.
You will never graduate from this dream of blue books. No matter how you succeed awake, asleep there is a test waiting to be failed. The dream beckons with two dull pencils, but you haven't even taken the course; when you reach for a book  it closes its door in your face; when you conjugate a verb  it is in the wrong language. Now the pillow becomes a blank page. Turn it to the cool side; you will still smother in all of the feathers that have to be learned by heart.
We wonder what the horoscope did show When Shakespeare came to earth. Were planets there, Grouped in unique arrangement? Unaware His age of aught so marvelous, when lo! He speaks! men listen! what of joy or woe Is not revealed! love, hatred, carking care, All quiv'ring 'neath his magic touch. The air Is thick with beauteous elves, a dainty row, Anon, with droning witches, and e'en now Stalks gloomy Hamlet, bent on vengeance dread. One after one they come, smiling or scarred, Wrought by that mind prismatic to which bow All lesser minds. They by thee would be fed, Poet incomparable! Avon's Bard!
Redbirds, redbirds, Long and long ago, What a honey-call you had In hills I used to know; Redbud, buckberry, Wild plum-tree And proud river sweeping Southward to the sea, Brown and gold in the sun Sparkling far below, Trailing stately round her bluffs Where the poplars grow  Redbirds, redbirds, Are you singing still As you sang one May day On Saxton's Hill?
The new year and a fresh fall of snow, The new year and mourning to do Alone here in the lovely silent house, Alone as the inner eye opens at last  Not as the shutter of a camera with a click, But like a gentle waking in a dark room Before dawn when familiar objects take on Substance out of their shadowy corners And come to life. So with my lost love, For years lost in the darkness of her mind, Tied to a wheelchair, not knowing where she was Or who she had been when we lived together In amity, peaceful as turtledoves. Judy is dead. Judy is gone forever. I cannot fathom that darkness, nor know Whether the true spirit is alive again. But what I do know is the peace of it, And in the darkened room before dawn, I lie Awake and let the good tears flow at last, And as light touches the chest of drawers And the windows grow transparent, rest, Happy to be mourning what was singular And comforting as the paintings on the wall, All that can now come to life in my mind, Good memories fresh and sweet as the dawn  Judy drinking her tea with a cat on her lap, And our many little walks before suppertime. So it is now the gentle waking to what was, And what is and will be as long as I am alive. &ldquo;Happy grieving,&rdquo; someone said who knew  Happy the dawn of memory and the sunrise.
You lumbered along the stadium like a sinner being marshaled to baptism, your head high and certain of convictions, the busy chatter of the crowd beside you. The radio is better, you declared, and baseball is baseball regardless. The wooden seat held you erect and mute, glancing at the tiny figures in the field. The open wealth of your first live game came at you singly as the Negro Leagues came up as you spoke of Satchel Paige, Jackie Robinson and your ancient radio. After the 9th, you fought the crowd, fingering the ticket stubs in your shirt, as we floated out into the night with the deep river of white faces.
I call it dress Flaring at the open window Like an unspeakable story. I call it lovely Thinner than you are Softer than your breast. It is not peculiar. It is not a size of fruit But a sweetness. Drowning in the street beside you Drowning in our black ghosts Our long, dark names I want to go dancing I want to go dancing.
The summer of nineteen eighteen I read  <> My father died and my aunt Took me to Chicago to live. The first thing I did was to take A streetcar to the stockyards. In the winter afternoon, Gritty and fetid, I walked Through the filthy snow, through the Squalid streets, looking shyly Into the people's faces, Those who were home in the daytime. Debauched and exhausted faces, Starved and looted brains, faces Like the faces in the senile And insane wards of charity Hospitals. Predatory Faces of little children. Then as the soiled twilight darkened, Under the green gas lamps, and the Sputtering purple arc lamps, The faces of the men coming Home from work, some still alive with The last pulse of hope or courage, Some sly and bitter, some smart and Silly, most of them already Broken and empty, no life, Only blinding tiredness, worse Than any tired animal. The sour smells of a thousand Suppers of fried potatoes and Fried cabbage bled into the street. I was giddy and sick, and out Of my misery I felt rising A terrible anger and out Of the anger, an absolute vow. Today the evil is clean And prosperous, but it is Everywhere, you don't have to Take a streetcar to find it, And it is the same evil. And the misery, and the Anger, and the vow are the same.
&lsquo;Where have you been this while away,  Johnnie, Johnnie?&rsquo; Out with the rest on a picnic lay.  Johnnie, my Johnnie, aha! They called us out of the barrack-yard To Gawd knows where from Gosport Hard, And you can't refuse when you get the card,  And the Widow gives the party.   ( &lsquo;What did you get to eat and drink,  Johnnie, Johnnie?&rsquo; Standing water as thick as ink,  Johnnie, my Johnnie, aha! A bit o' beef that were three year stored, A bit o' mutton as tough as a board, And a fowl we killed with a sergeant's sword,  When the Widow give the party. &lsquo;What did you for knives and forks,  Johnnie, Johnnie?&rsquo; We carries 'em with us wherever we walks,  Johnnie, my Johnnie, aha! And some was sliced and some was halved, And some was crimped and some was carved, And some was gutted and some was starved,  When the Widow give the party. &lsquo;What ha' you done with half your mess,  Johnnie, Johnnie?&rsquo; They couldn't do more and they wouldn't do less.  Johnnie, my Johnnie, aha! They ate their whack and they drank their fill, And I think the rations has made them ill, For half my comp'ny's lying still  Where the Widow give the party. &lsquo;How did you get away away,  Johnnie, Johnnie?&rsquo; On the broad o' my back at the end o' the day,  Johnnie, my Johnnie, aha! I comed away like a bleedin' toff, For I got four niggers to carry me off, As I lay in the bight of a canvas trough,  When the Widow give the party. &lsquo;What was the end of all the show,  Johnnie, Johnnie?&rsquo; Ask my Colonel, for I don't know,  Johnnie, my Johnnie, aha! We broke a King and we built a road  A court-house stands where the Reg'ment goed. And the river's clean where the raw blood flowed  When the Widow give the party.   (
In the town by the sea I walked Past the closed beauty shops where the Hair-driers inside gleamed like bombs And the mannikins wearing their human Hair didn't understand this game: The cars drove round and round the City blocks, their hoods and trunks Leaded in and young eyes burned Like radar above the red fires of cigarettes. I looked through bakery shops and Laundromats, searched the stark lights The put-down baskets, the dizzy doors For answers. I walked on as they revved Away. We moved at our different speeds Through rows of hot-dog stands, Amusement arcades, pinball games, and doubled Back. I saw the girl alone In her car, and she turned to glance At me. I thought the love that had Once thrown me away was sneaking up On four tires and about to say You get right in here. I waved. She sped up and her taillight bobbed Three blocks away through the mist. I stopped under the marquee, turned Again at the Watch Repair Then saw her eyes again. They were not Like those floating eyes of fish That stared from the other cars. She knew me, but something kept her From slowing, and made her gawk and appraise. She was brunette, and all by herself And passed me five, ten, twenty times. I waved from the bridge. Each time I thought I'd lost her Her gaze honked upon me once more. Twice in the dark I raced her till I stood where the Shell sign squeaked. I breathed deep that perfume she left. And was glad she helped to destroy me. More and more she floated past in shadows. I was chained to her recurring course. I was faithful. She spoke to me Lowering for once the window of cold Glass and we were there by the roaring sea. She said it wasn't love stinging my face But only the pure cars of America that Were dragging the main, looking for fools Who want to hold even the lights of Main Street, and the sweetness of a face.
The idea of event is horizontal, the idea of personality, vertical. Let fiction take root in the idea of the cross between them. The mind of the world is a vast field of crosses. We pick our way through the cemetery calling out names and stories. In the event the story is foretold, foremade in the code of its happening. In the event the event is sacrificed to a fiction of its having happened.
The worm artist out of soil, by passage of himself constructing. Castles of metaphor! Delicate dungeon turrets! He throws off artifacts as he contracts and expands the muscle of his being, ringed in himself, tilling. He is homage to earth, aerates the ground of his living.
Pale as the familiar cream and tea, you Float past history and into a cup; before My birth, a time so unreal I imagine Helen stealing your thoughts while you Decide to climb down for the favors Of my father: he insisted that you charm The sheriff and harness a mule for a free Ride north. One brother was born already. Drowning now as tired dreams like hands Lift the fallen gay parade, you drink to a mad Life father led leaving you always pregnant and poor. Some sons went unborn. I was out on the final knot Of promises, as your citadel collapsed in old age And my lonely father became a fabled and alien man.
<> The new medicine is wholly broken and done for: You must give up Profession and College, Barlow. Your fine  So practical so blindly hopeful of progress, 'Tis but delusion; all is ended and done for. For lately Stephen Coleridge in a current Monthly Has wittily in a few words the system exploded. Better retire and leave the stage, my dear Barlow.  You've been accustom'd in matters of importance To look to me to give you earliest tidings; So I devote a penful of little scazons To write the dirge of medicine and modern science. The wonder is how nearly both of us miss'd it: Nor would any whisper'd hint of it have ever reach'd me, Had not the well-deserving excellent author Most kindly frank'd me a copy of his dissertation.
&lsquo;Straight to the point&rsquo; can ricochet, unconvincing. Circumlocution, analogy, parable's ambiguities, provide context, stepping-stones. Most of the time. And then the lightning power amidst these indirections, of plain unheralded miracle! For example, as if forgetting to prepare them, He simply walks on water toward them, casually  and impetuous Peter, empowered, jumps from the boat and rushes on wave-tip to meet Him  a few steps, anyway  (till it occurs to him, &lsquo;I can't, this is preposterous&rsquo; and Jesus has to grab him, tumble his weight back over the gunwale). Sustaining those light and swift steps was more than Peter could manage. Still, years later, his toes and insteps, just before sleep, would remember their passage.
Those are the people who do complicated things. they'll grab us by the thousands and put us to work. World's going to hell, with all these villages and trails. Wild duck flocks aren't what they used to be. Aurochs grow rare. Fetch me my feathers and amber A small cricket on the typescript page of &ldquo;Kyoto born in spring song&rdquo; grooms himself in time with  I quit typing and watch him thru a glass. How well articulated! How neat! Nobody understands the ANIMAL KINGDOM. When creeks are full The poems flow When creeks are down We heap stones.
There will not be a burial, There will not be a wake. No ashes will be sprinkled Over the stream or lake. There won't be a cremation A coffin or a shroud. No hearse will park along the road  Your death is not allowed. There will not be a graveyard, There'll be no marble stone Bearing a carved endearment. No flesh will shrink to bone And in the town that loves you There'll be no sobbing crowd. No one inherits anything  Your death is not allowed. No grief will need to be disguised As just a bit upset. No one will wonder whether to Remember or forget Or which would cause the greater pain, And whether we laughed or rowed Last time will be irrelevant  Your death is not allowed. Others will die instead of you. A fixed amount must die (If there are quotas with these things) And strangers' wives will cry But I will have no need to say I loved you and was proud To be what I have been to you  Your death is not allowed.
The architecture gives more comfort than the scenes enacted in its armature, cream-quilted beds divided by the skylight into squares of sun and shade like alternate sensations abandoned as by picnickers on shore. How light the paper is on which this all is drawn, the ladder of old olive by the tub, a recent innovation, buckles it with its gnarls. The terrace door above sheds bars of summer shadow through the rungs and tiles the floor with diamonds. We aren't there to mar the lazy arc of light along its path from wall to trapdoor. On the beach, where we might be, it's calm, and also by the olivegroves and asters. The terra-cotta tiles absorb the sun. The village bell layers the air, birds, then an airplane fly a line into the distant sea. The language of the people there amid the smells announcing dinner rises.
When sun, light handed, sows this Indian water With a crop of cockles, The vines arrange their tender shadows In the sweet leafage of an artificial France. Awake, in the frames of windows, innocent children, Loving the blue, sprayed leaves of childish life, Applaud the bearded corn, the bleeding grape, And cry: &ldquo;Here is the hay-colored sun, our marvelous cousin, Walking in the barley, Turning the harrowed earth to growing bread, And splicing the sweet, wounded vine. Lift up your hitch-hiking heads And no more fear the fever, You fugitives, and sleepers in the fields, Here is the hay-colored sun!&rdquo; And when their shining voices, clean as summer, Play, like churchbells over the field, A hundred dusty Luthers rise from the dead, unheeding, Search the horizon for the gap-toothed grin of factories, And grope, in the green wheat, Toward the wood winds of the western freight.
What is the best thing in the world? This question to a crowd was hurled. A preacher said &ldquo;that grand old Book Which beats all men e'er undertook.&rdquo; The monk, he said, &ldquo;the best of all, Is time alone within my walls.&rdquo; The sage, he whispered in a chime, &ldquo;The best is the right use of time.&rdquo; The fool and idler both did sing, &ldquo;Pleasure is the best of things.&rdquo; Then the soldier cried aloud, &ldquo;fame,&rdquo; Spoke the statesman, &ldquo;mine is the same.&rdquo; Then a maid told her selection, &ldquo;Why of course its my complexion.&rdquo; Said a young man, &ldquo;there are two things, A woman's beauty, and how she sings.&rdquo; A mother, playing with some curls, Said that &ldquo;the best thing in the world; Is this darling here in my arms, Which we and angels hold as charms.&rdquo; Then the wee baby gave its choice, And it seemed like an angel's voice; &ldquo;The bes ting dat eber was or is, Is when my mama dives me a tiss.&rdquo; Conscience whispers and this is heard, &ldquo;Kindness, kindness, that is the word.&rdquo;
A set up. The carcass slung over a fork in a dead tree, the line-of-sight unbroken from shearing shed, perfect for high-powered rifles with telescopic lenses hungry for  certain birds think nothing of rotting sheep climbing dead trees. Nor, at a later date, when the ribcage has become the staves of an ark stranded by flood, of a photographer convincing his subject to sit naked beneath the wreckage, the grey branches side stretched such that the nipple closest to the camera becomes as sharp as the eye  a bullet.
Behold that New Jerusalem!  Her streets are paved with gold; Twelve stately gates, are set with pearls,  And yet the half's not told. Great walls of rich and precious stones,  Surround that city fair; Sweet music from that heavenly clime,  Swells out upon the air. Within those walls so beautiful,  The heaven immortals dwell; What peace and comfort they enjoy,  No mortal tongue can tell. The sun within those walls that shine,  Is He who's glorifed; Splendor and glory's all combine,  In Him for nations died. And all those gates of pearl and gold,  Forever stand ajar; To welcome strangers passing by,  Where nothing can debar. There shall my weary soul find rest,  Where blissful joys abound; Around His throne so pure and blest,  I'll lay my trophies down.
<> In the hearts of soldiers Running free blood In the long, long campaign: Dreams go on. Among the leather saddles, In the heads of soldiers Heavy in the wracks and kills Of all straight fighting: Dreams go on. Among the hot muzzles, In the hands of soldiers Brought from flesh-folds of women  Soft amid the blood and crying  In all your hearts and heads Among the guns and saddles and muzzles: Dreams, Dreams go on, Out of the dead on their backs, Broken and no use any more: Dreams of the way and the end go on.
Here, no woman, nor man besides, Nor child, nor dog, nor bird, nor wasp, Nor ditch-pool, nor green thing. Color of flower, Blood-bright berry none, nor flame-rust On leaf, nor pink gall-sting on stem, nor Staring stone,  No hawthorn's white thorn-tree here, nor lawn Of buttercups, nor any counterpart: Bed, book-backs, walls, floor, Flat pictures, desk, clothes-box, litter Of paper scrawls. So sit I here, So stand, so walk about. Beside The flower-white tree not so lonely I: Torn petals, dew-wet, yellowed my bare ankles.
I remember also, a stain we ignored till it moved its thin monument of legs and we stood either side of a head pillowed in mud; the tender wool of the throat. Those day-glutted, yellow-tinged eyes, salty as mussels; the blue black beaks of ravens. I remember that hopeless pedalling; the wool grease up to my wrists as we hauled, that last winter before we left for different countries. I remember: the coupie's straw-eyed stare of complicity when I glanced back.
The saint on the pillar stands, The pillar is alone, He has stood so long That he himself is stone; Only his eyes Range across the sand Where no one ever comes And the world is banned. Then his eyes close, He stands in his sleep, Round his neck there comes The conscience of a rope, And the hangman counting Counting to ten  At nine he finds He has eyes again. The saint on the pillar stands, The pillars are two, A young man opposite Stands in the blue, A white Greek god, Confident, with curled Hair above the groin And his eyes on the world.
Something is definitely  Those vices must I cultivate Simply in order to find out The occasion for this violent non-grief? Am I being infected by air? By the perpetual warnings of committees That we are rushing swine-like like lemmings Head on down the rocks to you-know-what Which cannot be stopped because interest and profit Always act too late? But I wouldn't know, I merely live On what I lived. Who's swimming In my Lake Success? How am I calling the shots for faith? &ldquo;Grand strategists are usually bad chess players,&rdquo; The shade of a woods is one thing, The income from it another, And their world is tomorrow We despoil today. Idols succeed public idols. Once it was Marilyn, now it's you name her. Once Yevtushenko, now Voznesensky, And the ugly is foremost the master, Allaying a vertigo it escalates With Muzak. May only the ugly drive out the ugly? Or are we just celebrating our sumps and our drains Before we fall into them? Well, cheers, old cock, It's over my head, I'm out of my depth And frankly right now out of my world In a world who possibly wants Except the mixmasters? (Take my hand, darling, Be not what I prey on That preys on me, or ...)
You ask how it is. I will tell you. There is no glass. The air spins in The stone rectangle. We warm our hands With apple wood. Some of the smoke Rises against the ploughed, brown field As a sign to our neighbours in the Four folds of the valley that we are in. Some of the smoke seeps through the stones Into the barn where it curls like fern On the walls. Holding a thick root I press my bucket through the surface Of the water, lift it brimming and skim The leaves away. Our fingers curl on Enamel mugs of tea, like ploughmen. The stones clear in the rain Giving their colours. It's not easy. There are no brochure blues or boiled sweet Reds. All is ochre and earth and cloud-green Nettles tasting sour and the smells of moist Earth and sheep's wool. The wattle and daub Chimney hood has decayed away, slowly Creeping to dust, chalking the slate Floor with stories. It has all the first Necessities for a high standard Of civilised living: silence inside A circle of sound, water and fire, Light on uncountable miles of mountain From a big, unpredictable sky, Two rooms, waking and sleeping, Two languages, two centuries of past To ponder on, and the basic need To work hard in order to survive.
Jump that jungle Jump that jungle Pump that jungle Pump that jungle Eat that jungle Eat that jungle Heat that jungle Heat that jungle Joke that jungle Joke that jungle Soak that jungle Soak that jungle Sling that jungle Sling that jungle Sing that jungle Sing that jungle Grow that jungle Grow that jungle Blow that jungle Blow that jungle Make that jungle Make that jungle Shake that jungle Shake that jungle Climb that jungle Climb that jungle Chime that jungle Chime that jungle Plumb that jungle Plumb that jungle Come that jungle Come that jungle Shove that jungle Shove that jungle Love that jungle Love that jungle The jungle loves you
A young man, walking alone, I came upon two snakes green, slender, their tongues and eyes like onyx, in the slow coils of copulation; stood entranced a moment before I ripped the two apart and felt at the same time my cock wizen into my widening thighs, my breasts grow heavy, tender. And it was horrible I can't tell you, can't tell you how horrible the disfigurement, the wound slashed between my legs, sensitive, moist, smelling of low tide and crustaceans, bleeding sometimes, the soft clots blooming like anemones. There was a coil of darkness in my brain that unwound and spread through my belly, down my thighs, a slow black spreading silence opening me, as unlike the quick bright flash of maleness as summer lightning is to the ocean at midnight. All the same, I was glad to go back. That silly marital argument might have been shaped in the brain of Aristophanes: <> <> <> <> <> <> You're  <> <> I (tremulous. Remember who I'd been. It wasn't even a calculated risk):  I was lucky to get away with blindness. If he had left well enough alone, blindness would have been the worst of it. But no: I had to have recompense, this other vision that stains my darkness with possibility: hard death, harder afterlife, pulled back to blood even from eternity to have my knowing plucked from my brain like eyeballs from their sockets and still no power to lie.
The living woods forego their care,  Their dread of autumn's mortal wing, And shake their birds upon the air,  And like a silver trumpet ring. The giddy bee's complacent croon,  Where long grey grasses bow and bend, In all its honey-thickened tune  Has no word of the sulphurous end. The sunflowers weave a golden clime,  As though their season had no date, Nod to the iron shoes of Time,  And play with his immortal hate. And, maiden, be thou mirthful too,  Lay down the burden of thy race, For God is walking in the dew,  An evening presence fills the place. The hollow woodlands feel Him there,  And dread no more foul autumn's wing, And shake their birds upon the air,  And like a silver trumpet ring.
The old idea of sacrifice was this: that blood of the lower life must be shed for the feeding and strengthening of the handsomer, fuller life. O when the old world sacrificed a ram it was to the gods who make us splendid and it was for a feast, a feast of meat, for men and maids on a day of splendour, for the further splendour of being men. It was the eating up of little lives, even doves, even small birds into the dance and splendour of a bigger life. There is no such thing as sin. There is only life and anti-life. And sacrifice is the law of life which enacts that little lives must be eaten up into the dance and splendour of bigger lives, with due reverence and acknowledgement.
I turn my back on you and have to watch the cars Competing on the rain-washed motorway. Only the rain And a line of poplar trees which seems to end At this rustic slum of ours can point To why we huddle here, in the middle-distance, shivering. When I shout at you to leave me on my own You know very well what I mean, but you don't come near For once you just do as I say your suitcases Clenched tight round property and the past. I could weep For showing so little strength with you. In the lull, I can hear the poplar trees Pouring on wind such ecstasy as we have known In this old barn with beds for furniture, Hearing the rain on the sloping roof all night, Not hoping it would stop or let us go. Tonight the same night is drawing in its colours, now As then, though we of that night are not the same. And nature can do nothing more for us this time Than count the hours till you must find your way Back from this place and start to live again. Your absence falls in front of you. Your gestures have withdrawn Almost to the horizon, where the rain, filed thin, Floats in across the miles of flood-fed earth That will come between us. I can see your car Move up the slip-road into the London lane.
Late into that spring when straggling snow blanketed the garden in the next plot, flagstone shapes melted upward through the sift, homely, where the first builder had set them, dark through the yard. Place, thus, the marker. What a father gives is never any one house, nor was this roof of ours framed with regard for us, yet an emerging ceremony bids: set down in the place thus provided each odd talisman. Calm and heavy as light within a room's binding, reflected as if sourceless and never-ending, occasion, whose sure havoc you will not escape within your own walls, allows also such worship. No blasphemy! for from your own life life will rise contained, free, newly marking the ordained phases. So the vine, planted, sent tendrils around the searched center, where your finger traced holds and the sun touched, rife from its burst pod of flame, timing great slowness. Fathered thus, the anonymous shadings of that good.
I leave my answering machine switched on. I know there are messages coming in but I'm plugged to my Walkman, selecting the next tape having just flicked off the radio. A writer's surroundings must be carefully chosen. News on the hour is the worst kind of invasion of personal space. I don't want my atmosphere broken. There's a click then my voice, with a veneer of friendliness as it fends off the world while pretending to give it a choice. &lsquo; <> I'll whizz through later, fast-forwarding and if I want, I'll get back to them. After all, this is my home. Later, the machines become silent. My last page clatters from the printer while I think about something to eat. That new Italian bread from Waitrose, Brie, coffee, a peach... After such a good session I deserve a little treat. Yards of stuff spew from the fax half-way down the hall ridiculous. Nothing can be as urgent as that. My answering machine is packed, ready for milking, its red light exhaustedly winking. I will play it back. There is a huge whispering like the voices of a thousand children praying I am at home. They are at the park, it is late, there is a man watching them. Too shy to talk to machines they fade. What I have on my tape is a dew of flesh, dissolving.
If any in an island cradle curled Of comfort, may make offering to you, Who in the day of all denial blew A bugle through the blackness of the world, An English hand would touch your shroud, in trust That truth again be told in English speech, And we too yet may practice what we preach, Though it were practising the bayonet thrust, Cutting that giant neck from sand to sand, From sea to sea; it was a little thing Beside your sudden shout and sabre swing That cut the throat of thieves in every land. Heed not if half-wits mock your broken blade: Mammon our master doeth all things ill. You are the Fool that charged a windmill. Still, The Miller is a knave; and was afraid. Lay down your sword. Ruin will know her own. Let each small statesman sow his weak wild oat, Or turn his coat to decorate his coat, Or take the throne and perish by the throne. Lay down your sword. And let the White Flag fade To grey; and let the Red Flag fade to pink, For these that climb and climb; and cannot sink So deep as death and honour, D&eacute;roul&egrave;de.
The time has come To stop allowing the clutter To clutter my mind Like dirty snow, Shove it off and find Clear time, clear water. Time for a change, Let silence in like a cat Who has sat at my door Neither wild nor strange Hoping for food from my store And shivering on the mat. Let silence in. She will rarely speak or mew, She will sleep on my bed And all I have ever been Either false or true Will live again in my head. For it is now or not As old age silts the stream, To shove away the clutter, To untie every knot, To take the time to dream, To come back to still water.
<> Not then our pleasure somehow to perceive, Last night we fell together to achieve A light eclipse of years. But the pale chance Of youth resumed was lost. Time gave a glance At each of us, and there was no reprieve; And when there was at last a way to leave, Farewell was a foreseen extravagance. Tonight the west has yet a failing red, While silence whispers of all things not here; And round there where the fire was that is dead, Dusk-hidden tenants that are chairs appear. The same old stars will soon be overhead, But not so friendly and not quite so near.
Now I heard in my dream  or dreamt I heard   the Last Trump    it was not loud seraphic brass  made nobody jump   sing glory glory    or the damned scream it was not loud  more of a hum   than a vocal murmur    a unison without voices  no star performer   blowing up the graveyards    tooting on a cloud it was the single sound of  all our deaths   unison of our last    confusion stopped breaths  unison without blast   or lambsblood bath    world without end Socrates died so  willingly Jesus   not without a struggle    gave up the ghost and a mother pleases  to smother her baby   in the Bronx or the Urewera    some other pillow brain-tissue splashed  fractionally after   the bullet-hole appeared    in the gib board freesias and catheters  perfumed the war   in a hospice for the dying    the Boeing crashed the Trump played on  like a sea in my sleep   or the thumb-stopped ear    where my blood can listen to the river of itself  nobody rose calling   deep to our deep    last unison.
Here is the man who fancies Arab ponies, Captain April, walking like the wind, Breeding the happy swordlight of the sun. Secret, in his looks and manner, He's not as inattentive to the music as he seems, That jangles in the empty doorways. But his well-tempered spirit, Rapt in the middle of a harmony, Flies to a breathless wedding with the Palisades. Then his five senses, separate as their numbers, Scatter, like birds, from in front of his steps, And instantly return, like water, To the common Bermuda of the flashing river. The mathematics of the air describes a perfect silence, And Captain April's mind, leaning out of its own amazing windows, Dies in a swirl of doves.
into the smiting sky tense with blend ing the treeleaps a stiffened exquisite i wait the sweet annihilation of swift flesh i make me stern against your charming strength O haste annihilator drawing into you my enchanting leaves
<> Reach out your hands And take it when it runs by, As the Apache dancer Clutches his woman. I have seen them Live long and laugh loud, Sent on singing, singing, Smashed to the heart Under the ribs With a terrible love. Joy always, Joy everywhere  Let joy kill you! Keep away from the little deaths.
A long stop at a hot provincial station. Heat turns to dirty water, little jewels of smut, rivulets of perspiration. The light crowds close, concentrates in pustules, drops of poison, off-white, plump, opaque, suspending grit in a soup of molecules. The trees too are hemmed in. Their heads ache in deserted railway yards, among lines of empty wagons in sidings. They bake in powders, asphalt heaps, among faded sings announcing factories with broken windows, wreathed in smears of smoke, in the confines of yards with scatterings of scrap iron, rows of used flasks abandoned years ago to trucks blocking gates that neither open nor close. The girl is far too smart. Her wrists are bare, uncluttered. She wears four finger rings, a thin gold anklet. How clean she is. Her hair is neatly bobbed and shining. All her things declare a certain distance: the delicate shoe, the lycra top, the jet black pants'rustlings and foldings. Even her scarlet nails look new. But not her book, the  an ancient faded copy. She's half-way through and turns each page with an impatient elegance. Despite the carriage's wild jolts and swings the book on her knee maintains its precarious balance and this, as Holub tells us, gives her wings.
At the open door of the room I stand and look at the night, Hold my hand to catch the raindrops, that slant into sight, Arriving grey from the darkness above suddenly into the light of  the room. I will escape from the hollow room, the box of light, And be out in the bewildering darkness, which is always fecund,  which might Mate my hungry soul with a germ of its womb. I will go out to the night, as a man goes down to the shore To draw his net through the surf's thin line, at the dawn before The sun warms the sea, little, lonely and sad, sifting the sobbing tide. I will sift the surf that edges the night, with my net, the four Strands of my eyes and my lips and my hands and my feet, sifting  the store Of flotsam until my soul is tired or satisfied. I will catch in my eyes' quick net The faces of all the women as they go past, Bend over them with my soul, to cherish the wet Cheeks and wet hair a moment, saying: &ldquo;Is it you?&rdquo; Looking earnestly under the dark umbrellas, held fast Against the wind; and if, where the lamplight blew Its rainy swill about us, she answered me With a laugh and a merry wildness that it was she Who was seeking me, and had found me at last to free Me now from the stunting bonds of my chastity, How glad I should be! Moving along in the mysterious ebb of the night Pass the men whose eyes are shut like anemones in a dark pool; Why don't they open with vision and speak to me? what have they  in sight? Why do I wander aimless among them, desirous fool? I can always linger over the huddled books on the stalls, Always gladden my amorous fingers with the touch of their leaves, Always kneel in courtship to the shelves in the doorways, where falls The shadow, always offer myself to one mistress, who always  receives. But oh, it is not enough, it is all no good. There is something I want to feel in my running blood, Something I want to touch; I must hold my face to the rain, I must hold my face to the wind, and let it explain Me its life as it hurries in secret. I will trail my hands again through the drenched, cold leaves Till my hands are full of the chillness and touch of leaves, Till at length they induce me to sleep, and to forget.
Being a wife is being good like me. She doesn't lodge herself in other people's ears and grow and grow her dead-straight headless stalks until your skull's so full of yellow crops you keel over. A wolf can get a seed in its ear and die within a week: it keels over. She's like a seed. Her polished hair's the sort for slipping into hotel dining-rooms for dinner in  dead straight. She's slipped inside. I am observing her. She goes about her business like Van Gogh. If anyone stopped her now she'd cut their head off. Do you know that? It's like he said. It's like a bad dream. She's only happy when she's short of time. If you say a word about the future she'll gag you with her sulphurated veil.
Cold pinches the hills around Florence. It roots out vines, truffles for lemon trees painfully heated by charcoal to three degrees above freezing. A bristling fir forest moves forward over Tuscany. A secret wood riddled with worm and lifeless dust-covered branches stings the grass and makes it flowerless, freezing the long-closed eyelids of Romans. They sleep entrusted to darkness in the perpetual, placid, waveless music of darkness. The forest ramps over frontiers and plains and swallows voluble Customs men in slow ash. A wind sound scrapes its thatching of sticks. Blind thrushes in the wood blunder and drop onto the brown needles. There are no nests or singing-places. A forest of matchwood and cheap furniture marches in rows. Nobody harvests its spongey woods and makes the trunks sigh like toy soldiers giving up life. All over Italy and northward from fair Florence to M&uuml;nchen and the cold city of Potsdam the forest spreads like a pelt on meadows, terraces, riverbanks and the shards of brick houses. It hides everywhere from everywhere as each point of perspective is gained by herds of resinous firs. There may be human creatures at nest in the root sockets. They whicker words to each other against the soughing of evergreens while the great faces of reindeer come grazing beside the Arno.
All the trees are in bloom though the gypsy moths, with their plague mentality, are blossoming too. Don't feel sorry for us. We've even learned to live amid Republicans; the avarice of gypsy moths is only a little more mindless, effective. It's okay here. The ocean isn't perfectly clean but on good days when I get low enough the waves push me out ahead of them; lacking wings or an engine it's the closest thing to flight. In France, where life and theory touch now and then, I don't doubt your pleasures. But here there's room enough for incorrect behavior, which some of us plan on. There are casinos and fifty or sixty miles of pines to get lost in. Socialism makes good sense, sure. But we actually have four people who love us, the tennis courts aren't crowded, our neighbor who has no politics was generous yesterday for other reasons. At another time I would offer you what falls short of promise, the America outside of me and my part in it. But not when you feel sorry for us. I just killed a Brown Recluse spider. The sun is out. I want you to know the afternoon is ablaze with ordinary people, smiling, full of hidden unfulfillment, everywhere, my friend, everywhere.
An itch in the auditory canal scratches for years, use unguent, Back pain a little, turn my head neck hurts Balding long ago, gray whiskey hair inside ears Eyes closed lying in bed, smart on my tongue, delicate raw gums sore round some tooth roots  From nineteenth year College chronic active Hepatitis affects my kidney stones &amp; high-blood pressure Right cheek paralyzed slightly, eye squints tired, lethargy dumps, no one's abdomen to kiss, cock skewed and lumpy erection aches  Why show myself these sicknesses? Show anyone? Wisdom &amp; senescence, sickness and Death come legended from Buddha to Kerouac Myself suddenly older I made a mistake long ago.
Let us mix a cup of Joy That the wretched may employ, Whom the Fates have made their toy. Who have given brain and heart To the thankless world of Art, And from Fame have won no part. Who have labored long at thought; Starved and toiled and all for naught; Sought and found not what they sought. Let our goblet be the skull Of a fool; made beautiful With a gold nor base nor dull: Gold of madcap fancies, once It contained, that, sage or dunce,  Each can read whoever runs. First we pour the liquid light Of our dreams in; then the bright Beauty that makes day of night. Let this be the must wherefrom, In due time, the mettlesome Care-destroying drink shall come. Folly next: with which mix in Laughter of a child of sin, And the red of mouth and chin. These shall give the tang thereto, Effervescence and rich hue Which to all good wine are due. Then into our cup we press One wild kiss of wantonness, And a glance that says not less. Sparkles both that give a fine Lustre to the drink divine, Necessary to good wine. Lastly in the goblet goes Sweet a love-song, then a rose Warmed upon  These bouquet our drink. Now measure With your arm the waist you treasure  Lift the cup and drink to Pleasure.
As days, then weeks, went by, my fears increased. Once a hare was taken from a trap; once I heard the crunch of a boot. Finally, late one afternoon, walking back along the upper bank, I saw a swimmer swim across the lake. I watched him for a little while in silence, then gathered stones and stoned him steadily until he disappeared without a trace, and silence re-established itself  silence, and the memory of Mother, zipped up in her nylon sleeping-bag, dragging herself slowly like a foot across the tarmac with a scraping sound.
How long had I sat there and had not beheld The gleam of the glow-worm till something compelled! . . . The heaven was starless, the forest was deep, And the vistas of darkness stretched silent in sleep. And late 'mid the trees had I lingered until No thing was awake but the lone whippoorwill. And haunted of thoughts for an hour I sat On a lichen-gray rock where the moss was a mat. And thinking of one whom my heart had held dear, Like terrible waters, a gathering fear Came stealing upon me with all the distress Of loss and of yearning and powerlessness: Till the hopes and the doubts and the sleepless unrest That, swallow-like, built in the home of my breast, Now hither, now thither, now heavenward flew, Wild-winged as the winds are: now suddenly drew My soul to abysses of nothingness where All light was a shadow, all hope, a despair: Where truth, that religion had set upon high, The darkness distorted and changed to a lie: And dreams of the beauty ambition had fed Like leaves of the autumn fell withered and dead. And I rose with my burden of anguish and doom, And cried, &ldquo;O my God, had I died in the womb! &ldquo;Than born into night, with no hope of the morn, An heir unto shadows, to live so forlorn! &ldquo;All effort is vain; and the planet called Faith Sinks down; and no power is real but death. &ldquo;O light me a torch in the deepening dark So my sick soul may follow, my sad heart may mark!&rdquo;  And then in the darkness the answer! It came From Earth, not from Heaven a glimmering flame, Behold, at my feet! In the shadow it shone Mysteriously lovely and dimly alone: An ember; a sparkle of dew and of glower; Like the lamp that a spirit hangs under a flower: As goldenly green as the phosphorous star A fairy may wear in her diadem's bar: An element essence of moonlight and dawn That, trodden and trampled, burns on and burns on. And hushed was my soul with the lesson of light That God had revealed to me there in the night: Though mortal its structure, material its form, The spiritual message of worm unto worm.
&ldquo;I must be beautiful. Or why would men be speechless at my sight? I have populated the countryside with animals of stone and put nations painlessly to sleep. I too was human, I who now live here at the end of the world with two aging sisters, spinsters massaging poisons into our scalps and sunning our ruffled snakes, and dreading the night, when under the warm stars we recall men we have loved, their gestures now forever refusing us. Then why let anything remain when whatever we loved turned instantly to stone? I am waiting for the Mediterranean to see me: It will petrify. And as caravans from Africa begin to cross it, I will freeze their cargo of slaves. Soon, soon, the sky will have eyes: I will fossilize its dome into cracked blue, I who am about to come into God's full view from the wrong side of the mirror into which He gazes.&rdquo; And so she dreams till the sun-crimsoned shield blinds her into nightmare: her locks, falling from their roots, crawl into rocks to die. Perseus holds the sword above her neck. Restless in her sleep, she, for the last time, brushes back the hissing curls from her forehead.
This long weekend we're here in an apartment Right in the centre, off St Stephen's Green, Ten minutes walk from everything to clubs, Museums, buskers, chain-stores, cinemas And bars. The place was offered us by friends Off west to Galway, to leave it all behind, Their all to serve us as a hide-away. Mornings have the seagulls wailing torment Through empty weekend skies; they swoop, so keen To see deep shoals. Their arcs have chimney hubs. A mile below them, awake and in amaze, We have put to sea, are lifted high on fronds Of waves, smashed downward, are lastly brined And washed up on the bed beneath the duvet. Beside us stands the Irish Permanent Head office holding hordes behind a sheen Of metal, glass and Brobdingnagian Chubbs  The hoards of those who have, who can amass Enough to build a home. But no ground rents Are paid at night by the hundreds that we find Stretched out on pavements for a cider soir&eacute;e. A landscape on the wall to ornament The living room. A Connemara scene Of bohreen, field and pole. Some fuchsia shrubs. Black hills. Dark twilight. But something's gone amiss  The twilight spreads beyond the frame, the fence, Into the room and out beyond the blinds Across the Dublin sky, across to Galway. We hover in our spaceship, self-important, Two floors above the brawls and shouts that mean The bars have shut:  Which fade towards two. We are anonymous, Untouchable, looking on the street that wends To Leeson's. Not a mugger stirs. And mind, If he did, we'd lift off for the Milky Way. With coffee and a bar of peppermint You stretch out with your novel, the TV screen Abandoned for Heathcliff running through the scrubs Across the moors, his raging animus. Another world inside these walls, which ends And you drift all the long way back. Now bind Your arms round me, your more real moorings, OK? A different strand of hair is like a portent, Licked round the inside of an otherwise clean White oven dish (another in the tub's Small plughole grille), a sign perhaps that someone's Life, somebody else's life, will cleanse This whole apartment space of us, in kind. We buy a paper for each numbered day.
A foetus in an acrobat's womb,  ignorant yet of barbed wire and dotted lines, hanger-on in terror of the fall  while the mother-world turns somersaults, whirling on the single bar, as her body shapes under water  a fish with gills into a baby with a face getting ready to make faces,  and hands that will soon feel the powder touch of monarch butterflies, the tin and silver of nickel and dime,  and learn right and left to staple, fold and mutilate a paper world in search of identity cards.
The coffin sealer is fanatical. He can't stop nailing what he can't understand like nailing poems to a great directness. Stop it, I tell him, as directly as I can, stop it, but he keeps driving steel through all my tender inns: The Inn of the Beginning, The Outside Inn. I am not a coffin, I am splendid whichever way you see me, splendid, radiant and free. I am a splendid coffin, a page from the Bible on which Salome lies, all myrrhed, oiled, shiny and so ripe for fucking that I get horny even now, 2000 years after the fact. It is her isn't it? And still I stand before a rain of nails watching depression, sorrow, disaster, fear, horror, tightness and control. The miracles just don't come fast enough.
What happens when an old black man, Toothless and raggedy, Walks into a bank, catches Some young, white, middle-manager's ear With a slurred tale of coins Hoarded from his wife and kids (Who would only have spent them), Leftovers from various hits On the numbers, plus God knows how many Easy deceptions. If you were this man, what Would you do with this true believer Who has walked through the door Of your bank, fired up With what he has pulled off, Knowing that on some non-verbal level He has encoded you (Or someone like you) As kindred, that only you (Or someone like you) Could understand this type Of fidelity. And somehow He guides you to the door And through the glass you see The trunk of this man's car, My father's car, its springs Low and ripe as the apricots Sweetening on his tree At home. He wants to give you The weight he has built, penny By penny. He wants you to lift Away what you first thought of him, Bag by precious bag. And he wants You to do it, now.
I owe you this picture: In some soon-to-be room, maybe the very one you find yourself in now, your mouth will fall open &amp; out of it will pour springtimes of silence. I'm thinking about light whirling around &amp; around you &amp; from within &amp; away from you, jamming the spatial veinworks of all your special, spacious being; light moving up your spine at 186,000 miles a second &amp; straight out the top &amp; bottom &amp; back &amp; front of you, radiating forever like that, washing clean &amp; clearing the way for what you're going to learn again &amp; again in this soon-to-be room which is, in fact, already twinkling in your blood.
Oh my love, in other times the things we are were beauty too. In ways that were I never knew were possible might talk to you. Or on and on and up and down seasons and days might make a place unlike such awkwardness makes this one awkward fall apart.
when the music was finished I listened to it raining and the world was raining over like a pot outside the window in the darkness when the rain was finished I listened to your breathing and the room was swimming downwards you were slipping from my fingers you were drowning when your breathing was finished I listened to the silence and a twist of hair went floating like an eel beyond my window I am Shiva till the silence is finished I shall listen to its music for I know the door will open on the wailing of the raga and the strangeler
She dips her bill in the rim of the sea. Her beak is the ellipse of a world much smaller than that far section of the sea's circumference. A curve enough to calculate the field's circle and its heart of eggs in the cold grass. All day while I scythed my territory out of nettles, laid claim to my cantref, she has cut her share of sky. Her song bubbles long as a plane trail from her savage mouth. I clean the blade with newspaper. Dusk blurs circle within circle till there's nothing left but the egg pulsing in the dark against her ribs. For each of us the possessed space contracts to the nest's heat, the blood's small circuit.
A long freight swims upwind. Each 4 P.M., the river limps upwind on schedule. Angus doze beneath the cottonwoods that flare and lean. The town beyond the pasture, once a speedtrap noted for harsh fines, now bypassed by I90, bakes the same dead gray the arm bakes sheered by lightning from the tree. The red caboose drags west sorry. The town drunk staggers to the tracks and waves it gone. With mean traps bypassed, no more fines to pay, we're free to love the movement east, eastbound trees, traffic on the freeway. Speed law: safe and sane. Real speed: blinding. Real chance to make it: none. Our best chance: love the leaf flash spreading white above the napping cows. The town drunk knows the world blurs, drunk or sober, and the world moves on out of reach against the wind or with. Boxcars full of cows go west for slaughter. Underground, seepage from the river ignites another green. The gray arm left by lightning turns sheer silver in the rain. Real chance to make it: none. Life becomes a hobby seen like this from hills, the empty freight returned. The town drunk waves goodbye to cars that flash east safe as cattle when their dreams revive the grass.
I must have a word with cactuses and thorny plants. I must put a question to the moon whose light is stolen. I must free the blood-red roses from their thorns. Wells without water, shameless politicians, cops who move with clubs like thorny bushes, Oh world, I must have words with you. We must speak while there may be time to grow the color green again in this, our world, daily done to death, our mountains trucked away, our clinging grass plucked up, the desert sands allotted all the land as if in triplicate, passed on by bureaucrats, who take the bribes of winds. And each branch burns now along with the voice of reason, allowed to wither, held in jails, barred like woodsheds. All the great fruits wither, mango, jack-fruit, wisdom of the ages, the soft plum of gentleness. Oh word, I must stop you, We must have words, and now.
My love, pills in her purse, runs, now staggering, now flushed, her speech racing near the world: whisper talk to it, dangling, &ldquo;Let creatures ride her, soften hard bumps for them.&rdquo; Who warns her from self, racing, singing, lightfooted? Birds, dogs, cats screech, bark, mew, conversant with air. Raise her from swooning, the childhood spirit. Catch her skittering, mewing with joy, barking delirium. Then are we loved, hand drawing swiftly figures of the human struggling awake.
Through those trees you traced a loud white roof the tracers wove driving for that farm where Germans hid. Not far, but years beyond the guns, your home town towers medieval (you can see it) up the sky. Long yellow days. Patched farms where bird dogs train. Twenty years: the wood's a pheasant grove. Here with wife and son, no water, French guns tracking thirsty down the slow hill to the well, you must have heard the pigeons circling the bells that celebrated wine or dreamed the wine and prayed the baby wouldn't scream. Day and day, the pounding. One day, the pound retreating, Germans going north. You came out timid to this gold dirt road. To walk was lovely, fields and quiet air. You walked away from war toward the towers and the miles were clean. The bells rang out the latest wine bigger than a bomb.
<> Black horizons, kiss me. That is all; so many lies; killing so cheap; babies so cheap; blood, people, so cheap; and land high, land dear; a speck of the earth costs; a suck at the tit of Mother Dirt so clean and strong, it costs; fences, papers, sheriffs; fences, laws, guns; and so many stars and so few hours to dream; such a big song and so little a footing to stand and sing; take a look; wars to come; red rivers to cross. Black horizons, come up. Black horizons, kiss me.
Love, though for this you riddle me with darts, And drag me at your chariot till I die,  Oh, heavy prince! Oh, panderer of hearts!  Yet hear me tell how in their throats they lie Who shout you mighty: thick about my hair, Day in, day out, your ominous arrows purr, Who still am free, unto no querulous care A fool, and in no temple worshiper! I, that have bared me to your quiver's fire, Lifted my face into its puny rain, Do wreathe you Impotent to Evoke Desire As you are Powerless to Elicit Pain! (Now will the god, for blasphemy so brave, Punish me, surely, with the shaft I crave!)
There is subsidence. My father would have hated this, the groan and the green slump of the chainsaw's work. Under the lime tree, white roots inch their tips into the sump of spring rain. The walls and weight of houses sink into their white branches. It's an ugly tree and it always has been. The bark is warted black as London brick and a bag from Safeways fluts and pops in the maze of cut-up logs, twigs and limbs. Years ago, the trunk split open with rot. My father spent two days painting it with treacle skins of creosote. I'm also there, watching from the kitchen door. Small. The brush strokes are spare. Out in the sun he grins, half with pleasure, half with effort. Now the tree surgeons rock at the stump, twisting it out. And it comes. A rotten tooth already dead. Tall as a man and heavier. Under the black pocked skin of the lime the wood is white as roots. It is barely spring; there's not much green or right in this. The tree is gone. The black hole waits to be filled in, and the rooms of the house alter to what is left of us, full of a new and unexpected light.
Observe how much depends on these, Curling from the column's shaft: Entablatures or corniced arches Vaulting high above the drift Of rendezvous and bureaucracies. (But here's a man who stops a moment, Looks side-on at his garden tools, And wonders what they're for. Almond, Rose, viburnum trees, new apples, Tall grass, grow skyward for him, patient.) They spring up from a fertile soil Of public cash and will not wither. They uphold both house and jail; Ideas of your homeland weather Everything and will not fall. (He picks up where he just left off, And sees that whathe grows will count, That a lot depends on a flower's life. But, fool, just what? What more could depend On these than on the fictive leaf?)
So day by day my life, thus nearer drawn Down the dark avenues unto the dawn, Cries to Thee: O Lord, Lord of life and death, Whom from our gaze the sad night sundereth, Reveal Thyself; be unto us no more A darkly felt thick darkness by the shore; But like the wind, that wingeth cold and clear Before the dawn by meadow-land and mere, Blow on us; scatter from our sickly brains The feverish fancies that ill conscience feigns; Raise us to stand like men to meet the strife, Fearless and grand, because within thy life Our lives are hidden, as is his to-day, Thy servant who from sight hath passed away.
What these sounds were there among the rocks and trees when I did not know in the mountains, and while I came down and asked of them, they stayed and returned out of me, to the places where they had been. that each object knew the way for Psyche as if it were a part of way itself, her self a tower into sky and Tartarus which led her there. What she was before this winged creature is not known. She must have lain as though in the wet earth she were a place of cave, before what was within her. 5 Soul, and Psyche, and Animus (Will : a man's life to be a continual Allegory all which is and happens, that one brings about, crushing like a herd of frightened elephant anything under foot, passing as I did on the back of the Elephant altogether puzzling to me how we did go between trees through everything as a will passed through any obstacle he was as anagogic visions in his power to pass, the Elephant on whose back I also was slim
I went walking (said the girl) on the edge of madness. She, my companion, gave way to the questions of my heart when my heart did not ask any questions: Such is the inventiveness of absence. Then her eyes, at ebbtide like the violet Nile Seemed to count their wages endlessly Reaching under the cool stones. Madness dressed her hair With long and cutting rushes. Somewhere this stream lives its double life. The cruel gold of its invading name Came to give battle to unfriendly fortune.
A nice little mess they've made of it here at the south edge of Delhi, using three bulldozers to rake away the huts, tents, jugs, and stacks of bricks where they  the untouchables, or &ldquo;former untouchables&rdquo;  built their fires, cooked their meals. One shack of cardboard, burlap, tin had a woman in it. They broke her hip, that's all, while the police beat up those gathered round who seemed not to like this action. One man lay down before the blades, grandson of Gandhiji, or so he claimed. Just one man killed, head broken with a club; no one not wretched need be at all concerned. Yet two women, Gita and Ramkali, even while dozers shoved at their walls, gave their babies to light, now sit and nurse them in shade of rubble, scrub of green, their faces determined and grim.
After what the family call &lsquo;the accident&rsquo; my sister brought me here to this small castle that rises from the shores of a lake rumoured to be one of the deepest, certainly the clearest, in the country. And when I say I fish &lsquo;from my bed&rsquo; I mean exactly that. Have a look. Swimming may no longer be an option but fishing is. I lay them on my bed, cold and heavy like abandoned guns, and tell myself how fortunate I am. The doctor, quite a fisherman himself, sometimes finds a scale, like confetti, sticking to my nightdress or my bandages, and picks them carefully off, like tiny mirrors, before he turns away to join the swimmers fanning out across my bedside lake.
The windows reflect the fuscous clouds. Why are we always wondering about what is going on offstage? At first, we called these glimpses dreams, but that moonlit jail was soon overcrowded. And sometimes it was a lot. So, we began changing the headlines, and what we could not understand (like a lunchbag left in the rain) became a talk that was no talk, a talk that was almost incoherent, except that each of us understood perfectly. &ldquo;Another language,&rdquo; we said, &ldquo;not merely an economy of words so spare that one word is made to do the work of hundreds.&rdquo; The torn postcard lay beside a pile of sawdust. There are three people (more likely there are five) sitting in the dining car of the unnamed train (The Sunset Fuselage Express, The Fortunate Fossil, and others hurtle through the mist). Outside, the dazzling yet almost familiar trees melt into an even more familiar mahogany corridor. &ldquo;Yes, I have decided to introduce you to everyone. The woman on the far right is Celeste, and next to her is Aunt Gladys and Uncle Hank, Mighty Morrisey and Yellow Duck Fever. Then, there is the rather well dressed man about whom I can tell you nothing you don't already know. Do not look puzzled. Such things are bound to happen, and certainly you have grown accustomed to the possibility.&rdquo; The leather glove is draped over the silver cane; its handle has been hammered into the head of Medusa, and its eyes are inlaid with diamond chips; bright concavities; bright as a sea in which an island rises; a place that remembers anyone approaching it.
Joyce says the man just ain't right. He got some kinda problem hid outta sight. And it's making itself known in his peculiar behavior. O, he present hisself real good first like a saint or savior. But then the seams start showin And you be knowin He tryin to cover up what keep kickin the covers off. Maybe it stem from a deprived childhood. Maybe he'd be better if itta would. Maybe he were ugly and his mama dress him funny. Maybe everything psychological grow from lack of money. Joyce says the man just ain't right. Anyway a wishbone probably got a bonehead jaws tight. Probably like to ride cows/made up gapped like that. Probably got ashy legs crusty feet and go to sleep in he hat. Joyce says you sure you wanna be involved with a individual who still got the traveling residual in he physique?
The actor's instinct seen at work clarifies the sense of transparent existence which has its own absolute and innocent movement like the flight of a migrating bird. I act to end the acting, not to be known but to know, to be new, to become a form and find my relevance. Observe and analyse, though this is not enough. It's not the artifice, it's the art that finally entrances reason and makes us human. I act, create the script of the universal theatre  this is commonplace. Originality is metaphysical, transcending consciousness yet falling like rain by a natural process. The actor's instinct metamorphosed, I am released from drama with nothing but its scars.
Whose wood this is I think I know: He made it sacred long ago: He will expect me, far or near To watch that wood immense with snow. That famous horse must feel great fear Now that his noble rider's no longer here: He gives his harness bells to rhyme  Perhaps he will be back, in time? All woulds were promises he kept Throughout the night when others slept: Now that he knows all that he did not know, His wood is holy, and full of snow, and all the beauty he made holy long long ago In Boston, London, Washington, And once by the Pacific and once in Moscow: <> <> <> And wherever America is, now as before, and now as long, long ago He sleeps and wakes forever more! <> The first day and night of death must be!&rdquo;
Given the rotund and revolving world Season on season tilting to the sun, Its orchard-ending hills, its weighted fields, Its August heat in which the growth is won. Given the pasture-loving herds upon its plains, Its hives like humming cities in the sage, Its vineyards rooted in the level loam To bring the sunburned vineyardist his wage. Given all this, all these, these simple proofs, This common casual promise of the plains, The very being's recreative yearn, Only the ultimate gathering-in remains. There will be harvest, harvest, summer's mastery, Garnered in fulgence from the fruited trees; The harvesters come singing from the fields, And men and women take their mutual ease. And men and women make their secret tryst After the blared torrential light is blind, As all the earth's cohabitants will come, Creature to creature, kind to pairing kind. Lord of the vineyard, Lord of the leaning year, Who burst the vine's forbearance out of the earth, Tender again the very plenty of your plains To bring the body its essential birth. There will be harvest, harvest, autumn's endlessness, Forever and forever out of the ground. The strong sons and the seemly daughters rise. The streams replenish, and the fields abound.
This way where November takes the leaf to sow only disfigurement in early snow mist gained upon the night I delved, surely as the city took us who can meet and go (who might have parted, keen beyond any sea, in words which no wings can engender now). For this there is a beam across my head; its weight not arched like heaven full, its edge not bevelled, and its bulk that I accept, triumphing not easily upon the brow ... And, margined so, the sun may rise aware (I must have waited for so devised a day) of the old woman whistling in her tubs, and a labyrinth of laundry in the courted sky; while inside, downward passing steps anon not to white buildings I have seen, leave me to whispering an answer here to nothing but this beam that crops my hair. Vaulted in the welter of the east be read, &ldquo;These are thy misused deeds.&rdquo;  And the arms, torn white and mild away, be bled.
Whoever has drowned and awhile entered The adamantine gates of afterwards, Stands privileged to reject heavenly joy (Though without disrespect for God's archangels) With &lsquo;never again&rsquo; no moon, no herbs, no sea, No singular love of women. True joy, believe us, is to groan and wake From the hallelujah choir on Fiddler's Green, With lungs now emptied of salt water, With gradual heat returning to clammed veins In the first flicker of reanimation, Repossession of now, awareness Of her live hands and lips, her playful voice, Her smooth and wingless shoulders.
Old Noah he had an ostrich farm and fowls on the largest  scale, He ate his egg with a ladle in a egg-cup big as a pail, And the soup he took was Elephant Soup and the fish he  took was Whale, But they all were small to the cellar he took when he set out  to sail, And Noah he often said to his wife when he sat down to dine, &lsquo;I don't care where the water goes if it doesn't get into the wine. The cataract of the cliff of heaven fell blinding off the brink As if it would wash the stars away as suds go down a sink, The seven heavens came roaring down for the throats of hell  to drink, And Noah he cocked his eye and said, &lsquo;It looks like rain, I  think, The water has drowned the Matterhorn as deep as a Mendip  mine, But I don't care where the water goes if it doesn't get into  the wine.&rsquo; But Noah he sinned, and we have sinned; on tipsy feet we  trod, Till a great big black teetotaller was sent to us for a rod, And you can't get wine at a P.S.A., or chapel, or Eisteddfod, For the Curse of Water has come again because of the wrath  of God, And water is on the Bishop's board and the Higher Thinker's  shrine, But I don't care where the water goes if it doesn't get into  the wine.
When I imagine Delaware I see a lonely canal, a lock gate stuck half open, water crawling out slow foam. I see a man also lonely, and grieving. I am not sure why. If it's Monday the sky's a promissory green. Later in the week the sky's grim white. I'm speaking our time, the time I imagine. The man keeps his face turned. It's hard to tell he's grieving, to see his tears for sure. Once in a great while, a woman, not invited, not from Delaware (I imagine no Delaware women) passes between me and him. I want to imagine more, not let the scene end there, the shadowy woman gone, the man still turned, the sky by now heavy with threat of night. Dog or dinosaur, I want something more. I've never been in Delaware. It must be something like that, however it's put, soft &lsquo;pass away,&rsquo; hard &lsquo;die.&rsquo;
Fine white blossoms on the water dividing the campus; we hook each other casting for color  &ldquo;talk to me baby, or they'll know I'm a brother; let me get my knife&rdquo;  Ice broken in the humid light of the bank; too rare a brother find to let it go  we break into  geese with fingers and pointed shoes, kicking, on the way out of town. The shoeshine parlor is the black stronghold, subcutaneous popping rags  &ldquo;look here, Jim, how'd y'all make it in this motherfucker, huh?&rdquo; &ldquo;Somebody's really tripping hard&rdquo;; We live on the inner rings of blues songs: history is a black woman anywhere, in the kitchen, in the land. Crisco, red apron, vaseline, the humming cadence of grease on the upbeat of heaven: <> Thumbing the printed page plates of painters shimmer: memory plus photography equals surface tension. In stopaction TV, lounge and lunchcounter, these burnt faces peer. Banked riverbanks flow in nervous air, the trees puff out to us with our breathing, shoe rags changed in their blossoming, greasepaint burned season by season.
It was boss cook's fault. He left the window wide open and now the stockroom was crawling with cicadas. He yelled and stomped them with his big boot feet. &ldquo;Stop!&rdquo; I said, and ran for the broom. Out front the regulars hollered for coffee. One cicada escaped and made an emergency landing on the counter. Pernell, who worked graveyard shift at the power plant, coaxed the thing onto his hand. The trustful creature didn't dart like a roach. It perched right on Pernell's knuckles calm as a man who's worked a tough shift with a clear conscience. &ldquo;He don't eat much,&rdquo; said Pernell. The cicada had a body like a dog poop, crystal wings and orange eyes that broke the light weird, like a 3-D postcard of Jesus. Miz Boulden cringed. Her lipstick was on crooked again. The cicada rubbed its hindparts on its wings and chirred. Outside, its tribe revved up the heat, like a UFO. I said, &ldquo;How do they know when to come back?&rdquo; &ldquo;God tells them,&rdquo; said Pernell. &ldquo;God nothing,&rdquo; Miz Boulden said. &ldquo;Last time they came my son was still living. That was when?&rdquo; &ldquo;'53,&rdquo; Pernell said. Boss cook hollered at me to get sweeping. Pernell clucked: &ldquo;Why you work for that stringy-hair sucker? You too sweet.&rdquo; I swept and swept. The cicadas backflipped and scratched the air. I threw them all  living and dead out the back door, and let it slam. The sun cut through the pines. I wished I was back in the woods with the bugs, listening. When I got back to the counter, Pernell had left. &ldquo;He took his pet with him,&rdquo; Miz Boulden said. &ldquo;That boy's not right. Now, where's my eggs, missy?&rdquo; Up the hen's butt, I thought. I bit my tongue and cleared Pernell's cup. Underneath, crisp as an insect's wing, I found the new five.
See them in snow under a full moon they told me. The shadows will take you out of yourself to when the Stones were erected, the time it took and the reason we try to guess today. Some claim, a way to tell time. Others say, religion. I guess pattern itself, the delight of pattern and, if we ride birds, center, circle and spoke looked down on lovely. Contrast it with uncertain currents of sea, gales that rip up what seemed well rooted rock and send flying like suicidal stars. These stones wear better than sky. See the clouds in tatters and blue faded to weak cream at noon with no explanation. Gales clear the grounds of brochures torn in frustration at phrases  &lsquo;the dates are unknown&rsquo; &lsquo;Herodotus states Abaris told Ptolemy&lsquo; when? I try to remember history and can't get past World War I. I've walked around them twice, December in my bones, knelt to get an angle on the two long rows going north from the hub, one direction I've always believed. And I've calculated the weight of the big one and guessed the number of men it took and the work to bring it from Wales where some say it's from, a special barge that wobbled and rode high without cargo, and that special day they put it in place and it settled the way they'd hoped and it held. That was long before people knew how to cheer, shake hands or offer a toast. I imagine them resting a moment, then grim with resolve starting down to the sea to get the next stone, and one woman thought strange but obeyed, urging them on and muttering hard at the sky a word we've lost. It sounded like &lsquo;shape.&rsquo; It meant &lsquo;world.&rsquo;
On either side of the river's bank, Sweet nature hath waken the bloom; And the vernal trees, and the grasses rank, Subdue drear winter's gloom. As thunders along the turbulent tide, To the end of her flow in the sea; How little she know, that her channel divides, The land of the slave and the free. The bondman ne'er ceased from his toil in the corn, He sang, yet the strains were not glee; To the twilight of eve, from the dawn of the morn, He had gazed on the land of the free, Long, long, had he toiled on the southern shore, And gazed on that flowing tide; And ofttimes grim thraldom he sadly deplored, As he looked on the northern side. But the rigorous law, and the river's flow, Defied him to venture the tide, For the hands of the spoiler, had threatened the blow. Should a bondman fail to abide. No hopes for his freedom, his head decked with gray, Is bowed low with trouble and grief; And his heart throbs with sighs, As he longs for the day, When death shall bring his relief.
From Bermondsey to Wandsworth  So many churches are, Some with apsidal chancels,  Some Perpendicular And schools by E. R. Robson  In the style of Norman Shaw Where blue-serged adolescence learn'd  To model and to draw. Oh, in among the houses,  The viaduct below, Stood the Coffee Essence Factory  Of Robinson and Co. Burnt and brown and tumbled down  And done with years ago Where the waters of the Wandle do  Lugubriously flow. From dust of dead explosions,  From scarlet-hearted fires, All unconcerned this train draws in  And smoothly that retires And calmly rise on smoky skies  Of intersected wires The Nonconformist spirelets  And the Church of England spires.
Angels, beautiful pauses in the whirlwind, Be with us through the seasons of unease; Within the clamorous traffic of the mind, Through all these clouded and tumultuous days, Remind us of your great unclouded ways. It is the wink of time, crude repetition, That whirls us round and blurs our anxious vision, But centered in its beam, your own  Still pivots and sets free the sacred dance. And suddenly we are there: the light turns red, The cars are stopped in Heaven, motors idle, While all around green amplitude is spread  Those grassy slopes of dream and whirling will Rests on a deeper pulse, and we are still. Only a golf course, but the sudden change From light to light opens a further range; Surprised by angels, we are free for once To move and rest within the sacred dance. Or suddenly we are there: a hotel room, The rumor of a city-hive below, And the world falls away before this bloom, This pause, high up, affecting us like snow. Time's tick is gone; softly we come and go, Barefoot on carpets, all joyfully suspended, And there, before the open morning's ended, The beautiful pause, the sudden lucky chance Opens the way into the sacred dance. I write this in October on a windless morning. The leaves float down on air as clear as flame, Their course a spiral, turning and returning; They dance the slow pavane that gives its name To a whole season, never quite the same. Angels, who can surprise us with a lucky chance, Be with us in this year; give us to dance Time's tick away, and in our whirling flight Poetry center the long fall through light.
Do you walk under will (what was that flicker of equinox's eye that lid slowly lowered? A star born in the west, my Mars your thighs, a joining? Who is that dark blue who snakes around your groins? That old. Devil will.Ruach, my own out to you always, children of my breath.They steal you.Blind. We are closed to this star &amp; its positions until we open.the devil's eye.Equinox, flicker of clothes going onto the floor, sweet orgia, even out of the rancid metals of earth the wiseman fashions his bells, conspires its music. No power that is not yours. No law but. Eagles leap from the sky, flame. You walked by that music of the running wax, cried the god name, he danced for you in the gold flame, only for you who knew his name, weathercock redface, seamount swelling in your waters, wind in the candles you carried, the wax caresses every hand of your hearts.
<>  Deep in my soul thy words resound; Thy lips where mine so lately bled  Gleam like a wound. Now, in the sad reluctant light  The passionate silence of thy mood, I feel thy robe's perfume, and night  And solitude. Till in the solitude I feel  The breaking heart, the dazzled brain Pulse with a longing tense as steel  And more than pain. More than all pain and all delight,  All laughter and convulsive tears, More than all sleep in all the night  Of endless years. Thy robe's perfume is deep and warm,  The dusk is deep and sad and low: I cannot save thee from love's harm  Nor let thee go. I have nor strength nor will to save  Thy life from my desire or me. I hold thee, Mistress still and Slave  Eternally!
Actress, head tilted, hithering smile, Advance, advance against me, Twittering proliferation pruned to style. Sterilized in us, their passions stare, Incontrovertible in the floodlit glare. Come, bunted out in borrowed quips; You have both enjoyed and incensed me, We are suspended on the line between our lips. I am glad no disobedience can Disarray this axiomatic plan: The rite Unrolls with the casual necessity of a bullfight; Pinned on the euclidean frame On the stage, night after night, Always our sentence and remand the same. Laugh with your mouth. On fiction fixed, the general, vague drouth Is slaked by the neat passion we do: And winning them I can approach you.
disguised bravadoall doors openrevise or polish incandescent spirittoo impatientprofanity's released my genius no genteel poverty (a woman's)or planno seamstress or mechanicwalking the Boulevardsvirility absorbed visiting librariesimprecise clever words decorating snuff boxesI enjoy with impunity loverslacking artifice the aura of a manself-reliantenterprising unabashedly romantic the steel button, my mindmy mistress's blue-black hair (Marie Duval)souvenir of clinging mistSainte-Beuve JulesProsperMerim&eacute;eiconoclastsrou&eacute;srakes self-irony not exemptAlfred de MussetI sigh &ldquo;Just another importunate bore&rdquo;deliriumto tantalize posterity hysteria15 pages a day or dieI write Marie Comtesse d'Agoult pale imitationabstruse declinerevengeful daughter frail Chopinsurvival of methe toughest sexless eroticism
After midday the great lazy slaps of the sea, the whistling of a boy who likes the empty hour while the beach is feeding, the cliffs vacant, gulls untidily drowsing far out on the water. I walked on in the dazzle round to the next cove where the sea was running backwards like mercury from people busy at cutting windows in the side of a beached porpoise. The creature had died recently. Naturally its blood was mammalian, its skin supple and tough; it made me instantly think of uses for it  shoe soling, sealing the hulls of boats  something to explain the intent knives and people swiftly looking at me. But there was no mussel harvest on the rocks or boat blinding through noon out to the crab pots, not here but elsewhere the settled stupor of digestion went on. The porpoise had brought the boys between fourteen and eighteen, lengthened their lives by a burning profitless noon-time, so they cut windows out of surprise or idleness, finding the thing here like a blank wall, inviting them. They jumped from its body, prodded it, looked in its mouth and its eyes, hauled up its tail like a child's drawing and became serious. Each had the use of the knife in turn and paused over the usual graffiti to test words first with a knife-point and fit the grey boulder of flesh under them. Clapping their wings the gulls came back from the sea, the pink screens of the hotel opened, the last boy scoured the knife with sand. I walked back along the shingle breathing away the bloody trail of the porpoise and saw the boys' wet heads glittering, their hooting, diving bodies sweeping them out of the bay.
What I said as a child I say as a woman: There is romance in common movement of sound and sand. Religion of a kind is true, affirmed. Ours is the worn water and ripe fire, leaves that burn alongside the road into smoke thick as Nigerian oil. A cover for magic and skill. We balanced a house of extended families atop our heads. The music drifted down around our faces. Wind crossed our cheeks in scarifications. Spirits feathered around our waists and fell to our knees; a dance of prayers that I said as a child I say again: We walked in the air of the ancestors, hot and tight like the space between two breasts. A crossing of tongues in the middle of an African night. The future is a quiet bed, a spread of hunger, and fallenwish is mystery to divine: A drum technique: hidden in a man's hands. We sit on the edge of our own echo, and craft. What I said as a child I say as a woman: We are from a house of balance and control. The road ahead is burning smoke and oils. What comes after is an act of will.
You were hungry and she let you into her life You grabbed her by the throat you stabbed her in the throat you stabbed her in the chest you stabbed her in the back you beat her eyes out you beat her ears off you smashed her skull you busted her nose you tore away her clothes you tore apart her mouth you said thank you the only way you knew how And I only wish for you exactly what you deserve for that exactly what you deserve It should not be the death not that we should gather now remembering that laugh between her teeth that spine behind the curtain that Egypt prize of window eyes not that we should tremble now remembering that we forgot the glory gone the old shoes on the street the hand out for the handout not that we should rally now remembering the glitter of the tricks she lit the horns the drums the stage It should be the dance It should be the dance she danced with death
In the sea, Biscayne, there prinks The young emerald, evening star, Good light for drunkards, poets, widows, And ladies soon to be married. By this light the salty fishes Arch in the sea like tree-branches, Going in many directions Up and down. This light conducts The thoughts of drunkards, the feelings Of widows and trembling ladies, The movements of fishes. How pleasant an existence it is That this emerald charms philosophers, Until they become thoughtlessly willing To bathe their hearts in later moonlight, Knowing that they can bring back thought In the night that is still to be silent, Reflecting this thing and that, Before they sleep! It is better that, as scholars, They should think hard in the dark cuffs Of voluminous cloaks, And shave their heads and bodies. It might well be that their mistress Is no gaunt fugitive phantom. She might, after all, be a wanton, Abundantly beautiful, eager, Fecund, From whose being by starlight, on sea-coast, The innermost good of their seeking Might come in the simplest of speech. It is a good light, then, for those That know the ultimate Plato, Tranquillizing with this jewel The torments of confusion.
All up Eighth Avenue in his apple-green pie wagon big Jim and I had a party. And was that traffic thick! honking us like geese backed up, I guess, to Wall Street while we loitered at a light and our thoughts were far away. The looming cop was plenty sore, &ldquo;If you'd keep your hands on the wheel instead of on his prick &rdquo; he said, but Jim unstretched his six-foot-four and both of them said, &ldquo;Yeah yeah,&rdquo; as we sped away in our cloud and handily came off at Columbus Circle.
Made of rhyme and metre, the ability to scan disordered lines; an imposed syntax; the word like a sword turning both ways to keep the gates of vocabulary. The first sound in the silence; the frequency of the struck chord; the electrical, ultimate rhythm of the full orchestra, himself the conductor of it and the composer. Who disguises himself in wood and stone; who has to be unmasked with much patience; who escapes in the end, leaving them standing, tool in hand, in front of a supposition. The agitation at the centre of non-being; the agreed myth of their equations; the experiment that proved them wrong; the answer they have overrun that waits for them to turn round. The word as an idea, crumbled by their dry minds in the long sentences of their chapters, gathering dust in their libraries; a sacrament that, if not soon swallowed, sticks in the throat. Whose conversation is the aside; whose mind is its own fountain, who overflows. Who takes the Cross from between his teeth to fly humanity upon it.
<> And sweep your floor. There may come princes To your door.&rdquo; I burned my broom, I cut my hair. That is all the Jot I care. &ldquo;Lay your cloth And knead your bread. There may come princes To be fed.&rdquo; Why knead my bread And lay my cloth For one grey mouse And one white moth?
It is the ecstasy of languor, It is the fatigue of love, It is all the shivering of the woods Among the clasping of the winds, It is, through the gray limbs, The choir of the little voices. Oh the weak and cool murmuring! It is like the soft cry With which the shaken grass expires... You could say, under the water which veers, The deaf rustling of the stones. This spirit which mourns In this deep sleeping sigh, It is ours, is it not? Mine, say, and thine, Which the meek anthem breathes Through this tepid evening, so low?
A desert and a weary way I trod,  By gloomy night shut in on every side; My heavy eyes scarce upward turned to God,  I wandered on the waste so wild and wide. Footsore and faint, no voice at my command   A thirst I felt, that I must surely die; If no one quickly lent a helping hand,  No ear should hear my feebler growing cry. The darkness of the night to that within,  Compared, was whiteness all was as the grave; With wasting sores, corruption, worms and sin,  As are the banks the Styx's waters lave. Unto my knees I lifted me and crept,  With bended head and face o'erspread with shame; Unto the Saviour's feet I crawled and wept,  In weakness I could only gasp His name. He stood above me with his pitying gaze,  Then stooped and touched me, vilest of the vile; New strength was mine, was hymns of joy I raise,  I shout, the Master owns me for His child. No more I wander in a sinful path   I follow in the way the Saviour trod: Upward my way, I will not fear the wrath  And judgment of my great forgiving God.
Polished and packaged, grotesque, The fingers tapered Like those a harpist might have  What music would it play? Probably none  The intricate strictures in the glass Would indicate otherwise. An ordinary hand, One without pain or distinction, Except that it's here, except that it's waiting, The object of no one's desire: For look at the cut there, Below the palm, above the wrist: A hand that offers itself, a hand to be kindled ... There is no hand for such hands, no pocket.
<> I have turned You out on chaos.... My need is deep To open to such comers on the earth. What is it then you envy so? You who are nothing Who might suddenly start Up from my torpor, up from sleep. Enter not now, through me, into agony: the narrow groove of birth. Endure the dark. I have turned You out on chaos. Enter not now, through me. Endure where You are in darkness howling with the wind. And I with you, I limited, you blind. Elemental, pure, Endure Darkness and the terrible lust of speed. I move On a firm planet, still, in me, the stream, The precipice of space, the earth's groove. Endure the dark. Strangely, I endure The nothingness of your your Unbodied being. This insistent pain Is mortal illness, being neither in The glut of life or death, caught in meshes, given Space still to turn About a nothingness that in its time Will have its atoms and its tiny suns.
<> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <>
Beyond me the common daylight divides The furthest journey is the journey that stays still and the light of the sky has come from the world to be packed for a journey Man conceived us, men made us. We work almost with perfection and we feel no pain. Provide. That their mouths may bleed into the cinders. With bronze and steel, provide. With beauty, provide. What the sun touches shines on forever dead the dead images of the sun wonderful Whose is the body you remember in yourself? The light. The rain. The eye. The rainbow   horizons form, random and inevitable as rainbows over bright fields of change Day has turned to a silver mirror whose dead extent the weeping eyes could never see Moonlight the dead image of the day   here by the light of that last coin we are alive within an eye: when the eye closes on us all it is complete
The crack is moving down the wall. Defective plaster isn't all the cause. We must remain until the roof falls in. It's mildly cheering to recall That every building has its little flaws. The crack is moving down the wall. Here in the kitchen, drinking gin, We can accept the damndest laws. We must remain until the roof falls in. And though there's no one here at all, One searches every room because The crack is moving down the wall. Repairs? But how can one begin? The lease has warnings buried in each clause. We must remain until the roof falls in. These nights one hears a creaking in the hall, The sort of thing that gives one pause. The crack is moving down the wall. We must remain until the roof falls in.
<> I had with you, and woven sweetly in, The odor of red poppies, sharp and thin; And for the little unexpected damp Of misted summer nights, an open fire To glint across the shadows till its gold, Mixed with the gold of candlelight, grew bold To touch your hair with fingers of desire. Now dead with all their scent the poppies are, As sweeter flowers have died; the fire has laid Its ashes on the wind. The lamp that shone So starlike in our eyes, is strangely gone From the new sky that our new eyes have made  Fallen like many another nobler star.
The paperback, its spine nearly broken, Left open on the table, closes first a few pages, Then a flurry, And, at last, the waxed jacket it brought To mind the slow natural death of an insect. If, as Freud suggests In his analysis of &ldquo;little Hans,&rdquo; the worst famine Begins at the other breast, at the very moment We are first shifted to it, then He must have intuited That this is also the origin of feasting, the calculus And plagues of insects  The text says  And my wife cries in joy for the angels Have rolled down a hillside The capstone to an empty tomb. She was Born in the country. I was born in Lyon. The second coronary humbled me some. I thought my arms were heavy with lilac blossoms, I smelled them Just seconds before the pain Cramped my neck and chest. This was when I remembered Doctor Freud dying in his London flat, at his request They administered with a hypodermic Two centigrams of morphine. His head lolling. In the suburbs of Paris, in the fields, the golden locust Begin, in season, a slow natural death: <> <> <> To mind the great stone reliquaries of another time When death was not a paperback.
is the lives of the birds. She watches them by the hour from her kitchen window as they peck for the food she has put out for them in the feeder. The food they like best comes in 25-lb. sacks, too heavy for her to lift, she has to have UPS bring it. She keeps the grains in a garbage can, scooping them out with a ladle as she needs it. Many kinds of birds come to her feeder. Sparrows, mourning doves, chickadees, blue jays that frighten the smaller birds; thrushes, blue- birds that have their own house perched on the fence rail; humming- birds, juncos, rose-breasted grosbeaks, finches, and some that she can't identify in her bird guide. She is sad when winter comes and some of her friends take off for the south. The birds are her comfort; they help her to go on with her life, which has been hard to bear. Her beloved husband died three years before from cancer, a hard death. And now her son has married a vulgar woman who thinks only of money. But she has her dear birds. They comfort her. They come every day and never let her down.
I know a seraph who has golden eyes, And hair of gold, and body like the snow. Here in the wind I dream her unbound hair Is blowing round me, that desire's sweet glow Has touched her pale keen face, and willful mien And though she steps as one in manner born To tread the forests of fair Paradise, Dark memory's wood she chooses to adorn. Here with bowed head, bashful with half-desire She glides into my yesterday's deep dream, All glowing by the misty ferny cliff Beside the far forbidden thundering stream. Within my dream I shake with the old flood. I fear its going, ere the spring days go. Yet pray the glory may have deathless years, And kiss her hair, and sweet throat like the snow.
The wind is rising and the leaves are swept  Wildly before it, hundreds on hundreds fall  Huddling beneath the trees. With brag and brawl Of storm the day is grown a tavern, kept Of madness, where, with mantles torn and ripped  Of flying leaves that beat above it all,  The wild winds fight; and, like some half-spent ball, The acorn stings the rout; and, silver-stripped, The milkweed-pod winks an exhausted lamp:  Now, in his coat of tatters dark that streams,  The ragged rain sweeps stormily this way, With all his clamorous followers clouds that camp  Around the hearthstone of the west where gleams  The last chill flame of the expiring day.
Shoes, secret face of my inner life: Two gaping toothless mouths, Two partly decomposed animal skins Smelling of mice-nests. My brother and sister who died at birth Continuing their existence in you, Guiding my life Toward their incomprehensible innocence. What use are books to me When in you it is possible to read The Gospel of my life on earth And still beyond, of things to come? I want to proclaim the religion I have devised for your perfect humility And the strange church I am building With you as the altar. Ascetic and maternal, you endure: Kin to oxen, to Saints, to condemned men, With your mute patience, forming The only true likeness of myself.
This is where the day went slack. It could have been digestion or the line of elms, the wind relaxed and flowing and the sea gone out of sight. This is where the day and I surrendered as if the air were suddenly my paramour. It is far from any home. A white farm, tiny from a dead ten miles of prairie, gleamed. I stood on grass and saw the bombers cluster, and drone the feeble purpose of a giant. Men rehearsed terror at Sardis and Xerxes beat the sea. And prior to the first domestic dog, a king of marble, copper gods, I must have stood like that and heard the cars roar down the road, the ammo wagon and the truck, must have turned my back on them to see the stroke of grass on grass on grass across the miles of roll, the travel of my fever now, my urge to hurt or love released and flowing. A public yes to war. A Greek will die and clog the pass to wreck our strategy. There will be a time for towns to burn and one more sea to flog into a pond.
Here at my worktop, foil-wrapping a silver salmon  yes, a whole salmon I'm thinking of the many bodies of women that my husband daily opens. Here he lunges at me in wellingtons. He is up to his armpits, a fisherman tugging against the strength of the current. I imagine the light for him, clean, and a green robing of willow and the fish hammering upstream. I too tug at the flaps of the salmon where its belly was, trying to straighten the silver seams before they are sewn. We are one in our dreams. The epidural is patchy, his assistant's handwriting is slipping. At eleven fifteen they barb their patient to sleep, jot &lsquo;knife to skin&rsquo;, and the nurse smiles over her mask at the surgeon. But I am quietly dusting out the fish-kettle, and I have the salmon clean as a baby grinning at me from the table.
A morning poem is to dig any new change, inside the skull's hairy dynamism. From depths the heights and colors wept and songs blue mus ic poun supon what are turning crazy windows when the soldiers' trucks have gone. This morning in Newark New Jersey there is too much snow in the ground soul of the lodge. The wives and meat be-ers' thighs are bumpy winter program the morning poem will be their atti tude&amp; alti tude their version of being seen. And what a scene Mis der Kur o saw her! A beautiful babe, but too much lip. Unquote, the trees and shit the streets and shit covered covered completely by cold blasts of white universe
Teru, teru. Mimetic liquid and musical as the words Well Walk, where he wandered with Hunt, saw Poor Tom's ghost, broke down, that last awful Suffocating August it is the wounding of Philomel That produced the lyric, a wild quiet echoing Of mortal tribulation that drowns in The singer's voice, as the singer dies and The pain that drives expression is extinguished With the sudden curtailing of the song. I am certain he has some spell that attaches them To him, observed Fanny Brawne of the intense Emotionality of Keats' friends' goodbyes. The fussing over practicalities, guilty self- Justifying and sentimental evasions At last set aside, their hearts got caught In their throats' cordage by London dock, As he got ready to board the boat that Would take him off to that classic land to die.
<> Up to the sky ridge, Flinging the seed, Scattering, exultant! Mouthing great rhythms To the long sea-beats On the wide shore, behind The ridge of the hillside. Below in the darkness  The slumber of mothers, The cradles at rest, The fire-seed sleeping Deep in white ashes! Give to darkness and sleep, O Sower, O Seer! Give me to the earth  With the seed I would enter! Oh, the growth through the silence From strength to new strength; Then the strong bursting forth Against primal forces, To laugh in the sunshine, To gladden the world! Who will bring the red fire Unto a new hearth? Who will lay the wide stone On the waste of the earth? Who is fain to begin To build day by day  To raise up his house Of the moist yellow clay? There's clay for the making Moist in the pit, There are horses to trample The rushes through it. Above where the wild duck Arise up and fly, There one can build To the wind and the sky. There are boughs in the forest To pluck young and green, O'er them thatch of the crop Shall be heavy and clean. I speak unto him Who in dead of the night Sees the red streaks In the ash deep and white; While around him he hears Men stir in their rest, And the stir of the babe That is close to the breast! He shall arise, He shall go forth alone, Lay stone on the earth, And bring fire to stone.
Yesterday I went looking for a room I went up and down stairs in and out of elaborate masonry, through and behind girders, and it was always: &ldquo;We have no room.&rdquo; And to an intelligent man (I like to think of myself as such), finding no place to put one's head should be a particular problem, something with a literary heralding: But yesterday, just like the millions of times they shunned me, moved too slowly to cut the high-priced pizza, called me &ldquo;nigger&rdquo; in word or action, I again knew something. And someone who too easily rests his head on white feathers (his belief that an antidote exists) may find his ease uprooted, this smart, quiet-looking black man finally having enough of it, nigger, nigger, nigger
If a life must be lost, let it be the rescuer's for that has a meaning, it is our Emblem. Therefore since all must be lost, be a rescuer. You may print a meaning on the underlying fact or make an emblem  Martyrs who sign their deaths as witnesses and the Faithful who died in battle for their faith, these print a meaning on the underlying fact. The Northerners chose just to die in a battle and this was glorying in the underlying fact, but we cannot say that it was meaningful. The underlying fact is that they all are dying. The meaning is Buddha the compassionate. Warriors merge and drown in the sickening maws of the sea. Seers and physicians are alert lifeguards on the shore that itself is being eaten away. Warriors as they drown in death shout &ldquo;Victory!&rdquo; but a lifeguard when he rescues some one, curses.
We arrive when the sky is starless, leave the car and walk over the bridge, crossing the dark fleeing river below. Sentries meet us halfway like an exchange. It is always three A.M. at the border, the artificial yellow light harsh on their uniform buttons and carbines, our pale winter breaths losing the shapes of our bodies. These are my papers. Trust me. The photograph is me, though from a younger lifetime. This is my longest, warmest coat. It is what I have. My relation with the person next to me has nothing to do with the contents of my bags. I claim no nationality. I am this body that moves through similar geographies from sovereign side to sovereign side. I cannot help but be a citizen of transience, always looking for the land beyond language. They escort me to a van and close the curtains, open the scuffed suitcase, open the toothpaste, smell the bottled water from Jordan, stand me up to undress. These adolescents believe their post is important. They are bribed by their own lessons of duty and don't consider what it is they protect. But I will not recognize it. I want to tell them, Take the suitcase. It was my father's. In countries of the temporary, we are forever accumulating, possessing, leaving behind. In the end, our hands will be finally empty. Here is the gate your government wrought. Leaving behind the blunt, obdurate coins that fall useless between night-borders, stubbornly ourselves to a state of undress, we transfer what is transferable, enter the new country chilled, fresh, farthingless.
A bird sails from the hole in that high stone, circles once and glides down, humming with his wings. He seemed white half- way up, but green now as he ticks the river. No one doubts the water. It will eat the best men from the sky. Gold. Not gold, but blue. The tan bird in and out of sunlight hugs the stream. Now he uses cedar bark for amber, takes the color of a hostile man. He has no taste. How satisfied he seems anywhere he flies throughout the spectrum. He found shades of pink in Italy. Man can give one color only, promise birds a perfect afternoon: trout and worm, a coy girl brought to answer in the grass. The bird will never brown hoping for the sun this river flicks. The red bird sweeps the evening water flat. Picnics never work. The army separates in current as they drown. Now the laughing black bird draws a hectic line of nothing on the air and drives relieved into the rocky dark.
With my forked branch of Lebanese cedar I quarter the dunes like downs and guide an invisible plough far over the sand. But how to quarter such shifting acres when the wind melts their shapes, and shadows mass where all was bright before, and landmarks walk like wraiths at noon? All I know is that underneath, how many miles no one can say, an unbroken water-table waits like a lake; it has seen no bird or sail in its long darkness, and no man; not even pharaohs dug so far for all their thirst, or thirst of glory, or thrust-power of ten thousand slaves. I tell you I can smell it though, that water. I am old and black and I know the manners of the sun which makes me bend, not break. I lose my ghostly footprints without complaint. I put every mirage in its place. I watch the lizard make its lace. Like one not quite blind I go feeling for the sunken face. So hot the days, the nights so cold, I gather my white rags and sigh but sighing step so steadily that any vibrance in so deep a lake would never fail to rise towards the snowy cedar's bait. Great desert, let your sweetness wake.
I want to tell you something: for three nights now a bird has sung in the road trees. A water song. The neighbours are complaining; no one knows what species the bird is. No one even sees it. Pools coupons titter against chain-links. Chip cartons scuttle past time-delayed, time-locked shopfronts. Then the bird starts to sing. You'll hear it with the window open, even when the first rain gathers to a downpour, hallways sweet with the residue of road-tar. Then you can grin, or watch me grin at woodpigeons in wet weather sat in the road trees, suffering damp white collars. Like divorcees, not looking at one another.
Until I was nine we shared a room, Little sister, you and I in the dark, My shirt folded beside your dress. Often, half waking, you sought my arm, Your breath calming against my cheek After some dream distress. Morning was boy-time, you also Clambering rocks, spotting trains, The stream twirling our boats. Evening softened to fire-glow, Encyclopaedias, guess games, The piano stumbling over its notes. Later such comradeship was thought unwise. I slept alone, went to a different school (More like a foreign land!). Growing-up was growing apart. New girls had ways Smarter than yours, you brought home real Boyfriends I couldn't stand, Married a brotherly sort of chap And had a boy, a girl, and so Started that round again. A snap (I think it's you) nicely suggests A woman men like to know, Gentle and serious yet full of zest. I greet you there, a shimmering she On the far side of my mind, a love Softly focused, never outworn. I have made this history Out of a life life couldn't achieve, Little sister you who were never born.
Closing the book, I find I have left my head inside. It is dark in here, but the chapters open their beautiful spaces and give a rustling sound, words adjusting themselves to their meaning. Long passages open at successive pages. An echo, continuous from the title onward, hums behind me. From in here the world looms, a jungle redeemed by these linked sentences carved out when an author traveled and a reader kept the way open. When this book ends I will pull it inside-out like a sock and throw it back in the library. But the rumor of it will haunt all that follows in my life. A candleflame in Tibet leans when I move.
From the felled trunk the bark Has rotted away, its wood Worn into a fibred relief; Grey-white the scars where branches Splintered, shrunken the bracken Which covered it in spring; Years since the severed life Died out. What life it has now Is from the winter sun. The sea's blue at dusk, tiled with waves, Glazed by the mist, Deepens. Across it from the steep-edged coomb A beech-trunk lifts, Pale in the drying wind. Sun opening the coomb In the morning Moves down the side and curves out anew The gentle incline of its lap, Like a human goodwill Illuminating the mind That dwelt winterlong in shade As though the shade were life, And reaches With a sense of warm discovery Over budded trees, Bent bracken, brittle leaf. The sapwood rots; But where they lie embedded The hard little cores of broken twigs Stay sharp. Day overcast: A patch of intenser brightness Folds itself away amid the atmosphere, Shedding light on the sea  Clarity that, unable to attain Full sway, (Some flaw of will preventing it, Some loss of heart) Withdraws, prefers to fade, Leaving only its shadow in the mind. Spermatozoa of flame Seed the dark, curling Long momentary tails. The fire flares at ease  Could not burn harder Or be more sheerly itself.
Cancer strikes and I lose my left hand: My whole life has to be reorganized Since I can no longer earn my living as a typist. I am now one of the obviously crippled Although to tell the truth I have been one of them for as long as I can remember, And all those years I was aware That I was in the state of cancer if not cancerous yet. My concern was laughed at. Life is simpler now; no one will dream Of looking further than my handless arm For my deformity; it will be a hook to hang my troubles on, For of course I shall wear a hook in its place Rather than one of those prosthetic appliances, And I shall join the ranks of other men Who blame their troubles on similar unalterable situations Such as the wife, or automation (the machine replacing the hand), And they are right. Something is wrong with people Who say it's me that's wrong, my nature needs changing. Our nature is God's various will And each oddity precious for the evolving animal kingdom. Now that I am back to hunt and peck I thank God for granting me this reprieve From that endless unraveling of my nature. Knots are too difficult for one hand to be bothered with: Now I cut them through and laugh for the liberation.
Bitter blue fingers Winter nineteen sixty-three A.D. showa thirty-eight Over a low pine-covered splay of hills in Shiga West-south-west of the outlet of Lake Biwa Domura village set on sandy fans of the sweep and turn of a river Draining the rotten-granite hills up Shigaraki On a nineteen-fifty-seven Honda cycle model C Rode with some Yamanashi wine &ldquo;St Neige&rdquo; Into the farmyard and the bellowing kiln. Les &amp; John In ragged shirts and pants, dried slip Stuck to with pineneedle, pitch, dust, hair, woodchips; Sending the final slivers of yellowy pine Through peephole white blast glow No saggars tilting yet and segers bending neatly in a row  Even their beards caked up with mud &amp; soot Firing for fourteen hours. How does she go. Porcelain &amp; stoneware: cheese dish. twenty cups. Tokuri. vases. black chawan Crosslegged rest on the dirt eye cockt to smoke  The hands you layed on clay Kickwheeld, curling, creamd to the lip of nothing, And coaxt to a white dancing heat that day Will linger centuries in these towns and loams And speak to men or beasts When Japanese and English Are dead tongues.
8 BLACK BOYS IN A SOUTHERN JAIL. WORLD, TURN PALE! 8 black boys and one white lie. Is it much to die? Is it much to die when immortal feet March with you down Time's street, When beyond steel bars sound the deathless drums Like a mighty heart-beat as They come? Who comes? Christ, Who fought alone. John Brown. That mad mob That tore the Bastille down Stone by stone. Moses. Jeanne d'Arc. Dessalines. Nat Turner. Fighters for the free. Lenin with the flag blood red. (Not dead! Not dead! None of those is dead.) Gandhi. Sandino. Evangelista, too, To walk with you  8 BLACK BOYS IN A SOUTHERN JAIL. WORLD, TURN PALE!
I walked you sank you in blackglass the trouble with the starsis they're too farfrommyeyestoyours First Wing and last pages of thealbatross I satellited youcocktailson a petrifiedface Thel i q u e f a c t i o nof thewalls of the city For the Lord made all thingsgreen opal eye,lice,dung for jazz, green is the essence of the lightfooted CLOSE UP like a mandolin sneaking up to you Beatrixed and marveled on FORTUNA'S GATE
who hoarded among the monthly bank statements nude photos, the drawer locked, the key in his pocket, still could complain of the stupidity of his help- their incompetency, their secretiveness; he could sense it in their guarded snickers when he criticized; who could walk the shop in possession as he walked, stoop-shouldered, careless how he went, sagging; it was his shop and his machinery and his steel cabinet where the photos lay.
Where there is violet in the green of the sea the eye rests, knowing a depth there. In the depth where the violet changes, the sea surrenders to the eye a knowledge. Where the blue of shadow rests upon green the sea knows desire, sorrow becomes joy where there is violet in the eye of the sea. In the changing depth of desire the I knows it is open, the distant sea withholds nothing, surrenders nothing, save to the eye. Rests in the sea desire of joy, heart's sorrow. Where there is violet in the green of the sea.
The weather wept, and all the trees bent down; Bent down their birds: the light waves took the waves; Each single substance gliddered to the stare; Each vision purely, purely was its own:  There was no light; there was no light at all: Far from the mirrors all the bushes rang With their hard snow; leaned on the lonely eye; Cold evil twinkled tighter than a string; a fire Hung down: And I was only I.  There was no light; there was no light at all: Each cushion found itself a field of pins, Prickling pure wishes with confusion's ire; Hope's holy wrists: the little burning boys Cried out their lives an instant and were free.  There was no light; there was no light at all.
<> Flickered from the branches that brush the eaves; While the black wind that hurried after Reeled with an idiot's empty laughter. ... And I who stood in the square below Swayed with each eddy to and fro Like a quivering mast in the hurricane, Till my face was blue with cold and rain. At last I coughed and rasped my throat To shatter forth a trumpet note: &ldquo;Come, friends of mine, the bellowing gale Has ripped the clouds as it tatters a sail. See! In the west a sword of blue Pierces their chilliness through and through, And the sun will burst in a yellow haze To dazzle the hillsides and amaze. Swift! Harness your mount! We shall ride, ride, ride Over the saffron countryside. There are serpents yet to be taught our fear, And each of us couches a magic spear. On! youth is ours and hearts of flame That leap at the sound of a warrior's name; So let us leave our Camelot As Gawaine or Sir Launcelot, Or Geraint for his entrancing Queen. Over the moor and behind that screen Of enchanted forest we shall find Adventure on each flaw of the wind  A dragon with his blackening breath, A giant with the arm of death, A dark knight, glowering by the moat Of the keep where he's hidden, lonely there, A damozel with amber hair That twists like a vine about her throat. Come! ride on the gale with me, my friend; We shall find romance at our gallop's end!&rdquo; &ldquo;... Ah yes, I've mounted my horse!&rdquo; he cries, &ldquo;But the dust o' the road swirls up in my eyes!&rdquo;
last time I got married was yesterday (in bed) we stayed there talking it over nobody shook hands but the agreement felt very good as a matter of fact so that was what will be the absolute last time I ever get married
Doubt not, my tears, how you should so aspire, When other showers all downwards still do rain, For they were drawn up from this watery plain, And therefore to their fountains must retire. But your original is far, far higher, And from those characters derives your vein, Which seated are above the starry train, And therefore towards heaven you still desire. How it is then your tears the earth bedew, And go not straight to heaven? Indeed 'tis true, They take their race upon humility, And after without loss to heaven do fly: For God, who giveth all things without measure, Keepeth accompt of tears as of his treasure.
We thought him a musician we could cope with a Pied Piper who belonged to the place  going out there with his whistle and calling the foxes, bringing in the skins and collecting the bounties; sometimes we stroked the red bodies, looked into their eyes, examined the needle-sharp teeth  &lsquo;Don't prick yourself on those things,&rsquo; he'd say, &lsquo;never know what they might carry.&rsquo; And we'd grin, though moving our hands sharply away. He had us hooked. We begged to hear him whistle up a tune, but he denied us. Our parents told us to leave him alone, he had a job to do and shouldn't be distracted. As we grew older we heard stories about him. And the foxes were hunted out. We defended him, though with queasy stomachs. None of us owning guns and all of us realising we'd heard without knowing the strains of the whistle.
The wind of that dying year made yellow the leaves, Sycamore, cottonwood. Downwind in the faltering air they slipped feebly, They hung in the spikeweed. Clouds westward told rain, and three crows weaving the hanging sky Made in their throats the song. We lay in the edging air, under the late sun, touching. There was the waiting thigh, the loose and indolent flesh hung on the bone, Easy with autumn, not burning. We lay in the sun with the leaves going, And the smell of that month on the wind. And being closer to sleep than to love, We knew it for autumn, that made husks of the fruit, that seared off the flowers. We knew it for that seasonal dying, And sank to the sand, to the broken leaf, And focused our eyes on April.
They have found a new moon; it stands on my shoulder. They call it moon because they lack imagination. I call it moon because I lack all conviction. It has another name, but that name, like God's is terrible to pronounce. It is terrible to pronounce like Czrcbrno, a hamlet in the Balkans. The moon calls itself moon because it lacks self-knowledge. This moon sometimes whispers and you never heard such rubbish. I listen because I lack strength, I smile because I have no muscles with which to frown. At certain times of the day, the moon hides. When I am an old man with flour in my beard, and packs of incontinence pants on the sideboard, the moon will still be new, and will be perpetually discovered as new by generations of scientists. The moon is not a nice man.
Theory: Inconvenienced subject will return to hospital if loaned Thunderbird Withdrawn. Hope: Subject returns, Treatment: Foreclosure for nine months unpaid mortgage; wife tells subject hospital wants deposit, Diseased cyst removal: &lsquo;Ain't you gonna give me a little kiss good-bye&rsquo; Subject-wife: To return with robe and curlers  Subject tells friend he'll pay $15 to F's stepfather if he'll drive him to pick up money owed him. &ldquo;This guy lives down the street, I don't want him to see me coming.&rdquo; 'It looked odd for a car filled with blacks to be parked in the dark in a white neighborhood, so we pulled the car out under a streetlight so everybody could see us.&rdquo; Store manager: &ldquo;I first hit him with two bullets so I pulled the trigger until my gun was empty.&rdquo; &ldquo;I'm going to kill you, you white  told police. Police took carload, F and F's parents for further questioning. Subject died on operating table: 5 hrs: Subject buried on grass slope, 200 yards east of Kennedy Memorial, overlooking Potomac and Pentagon, to the south, Arlington National Cemetery. Army honor guard in dress blues, carried out assignment with precision:
Emerson thought the bride had one eye Boring into the dark cellar. You stand In the dry tub shaking powder over your shoulders. The neighborhood is busy. It is like anxiety: housepainters dressed in white, Two hold a ladder while the third climbs, Drenched in sunlight they are blind travelers In a vertical landscape of cut ivory. On my mother's verandah the addled missionary drinks tea. She says That in India if a child is bitten By a cobra, the villagers leave at the site A saucer of milk and hibiscus flowers. She says That in India there is fur on a struck bell Like fur on a bee. A toad eats a fly. A toad sleeps. Out in the cistern There is the great gone stomach of algae. While the missionary speaks, we drag An open sheet of newspaper behind us, we rise And then kneel, with a spade we are burying The heads of sunfish in the roots of rosebushes. It will feed the flowers. Emerson thought His bride Had her one eye on the cool hams in the cellar. Later, on a walk, we stand on a train trestle And hold each other: We are lost watching the hot track reach back Under the flowering trees, the track Has white pollen on it to the vanishing point. It is unsustainable in the long day, Cattle cars rattling by at sunset.
I would wait for the tunnels to glide into overdrive, the shanked curves glittering with truck tires, the last four bars of Clifford's solo on &ldquo;'Round Midnight&rdquo; somehow embossed on my memo stand. Coming up the hill from Harrisburg, I heard Elvin's magical voice on the tynes of a bus going to Lexington; McCoy my  his tonics bristling in solemn gyrations of the left hand. At a bus terminal waiting to be taken to the cemetery, I thought of Lester Young's Chinese face on a Christmas card mailed to my house in Queens: Prez! I saw him cry in joy as the recordings Bird memorized in Missouri breaks floated on Bessie's floodless hill: <> such sweetness again: Lady said Prez was the closest she ever got to real escort, him worrying who was behind him in arcades memorizing his tunes. Driving into this Wyoming sunset, rehearsing my perfect foursome, ordering our lives on off-days, it's reported I'd gone out like Bird recovering at Camarillo, in an off-stage concert in L.A. I never hear playbacks of that chorus of plaints, Dolphy's love-filled echoings, perhaps my mother's hands calling me to breakfast, the Heath Brothers, in triplicate, asking me to stand in; when Miles smacked me for being  <> tunes I'd forgotten in my suspension on the pentatonic scale; my solos shortened, when I joined Monk he drilled black keys into registers of pain, joy rekindled in McCoy's solo of &ldquo;The Promise.&rdquo; What does Detroit have to give my music as elk-miles distance into shoal-lights, dashes at sunrise over Oakland: Elvin from Pontiac, McCoy from Philly, Chambers from Detroit waltzing his bass. I can never write a bar of this music in this life chanting toward paradise in this sunship from Motown.
Moonlight. Metaphorical of Abstract perfect justice Whitening white snow, so bright I read the thermometer: a hair above Forty below. Can't talk, arctic air Scorching my throat. But how Immense this high tension System is! With somewhere, we know, A weak connection fraying Out there. It will go. Flare, stink Of burnt metal, and lights Out. Absolute zero bursts In, implosion a sudden suck. No cry. Air will freeze Solid, sound will freeze Solid, every word Stuck on a still wave. The tapes Heaped in a tangle, unplayable. The moon. Close ornate cornice In upper foreground to dramatize Our photo's perspective, a still sweep To absolute everywhere. Thinking: tonight Or soon. Everything's trite or classical And I can't draw the line. Stiff, Almost solid, staring with frozen eyes.
Roots locked in the ground, Linking weather and skull, Hold, as the wheels go round Of a waggon heavy to pull, So much life to a track Where the clustered voices climb, No sapphire playing back Will ever recall their time. Iron follows the horse, Knives of the tractor hooves, Yet the ploughman knows his course, That needle fixed in the grooves. Those men are bound to their load, Caught in the track of sound, Fading back down the road From tenacious roots in the ground. Under the heavy tread Of boot and tractor, strayed Oak and crab-apple spread To the girth of their summer shade, No single taproot lost Of the thorntree's clutching hold, Gripping the coat of frost With a strength that fears no cold. Who but they can revive The shadow of leaf and bloom, Keeping the sap alive In a dark and icy room, Deaf to the noise of the harrow Breaking the winter clay, Guarding, deep in the marrow, The reluctant soul of day?
For God in me had shoulders of warped wood and was a well made ill with holy water. Like the bitter withy God in me was thin, a broken spine, a broken violin, a whole ship burial of sound. God was the excommunicated wind and crooked as a thorn or gargoyle. God had a withered hand, a tongue of wood like half a castanet and could no longer set a keel of thought upon the water at Monkwearmouth as in Bede he could.
In the town by the sea I walked Past the closed beauty shops where the Hair-driers inside gleamed like bombs And the mannikins wearing their human Hair didn't understand this game: The cars drove round and round the City blocks, their hoods and trunks Leaded in and young eyes burned Like radar above the red fires of cigarettes. I looked through bakery shops and Laundromats, searched the stark lights The put-down baskets, the dizzy doors For answers. I walked on as they revved Away. We moved at our different speeds Through rows of hot-dog stands, Amusement arcades, pinball games, and doubled Back. I saw the girl alone In her car, and she turned to glance At me. I thought the love that had Once thrown me away was sneaking up On four tires and about to say You get right in here. I waved. She sped up and her taillight bobbed Three blocks away through the mist. I stopped under the marquee, turned Again at the Watch Repair Then saw her eyes again. They were not Like those floating eyes of fish That stared from the other cars. She knew me, but something kept her From slowing, and made her gawk and appraise. She was brunette, and all by herself And passed me five, ten, twenty times. I waved from the bridge. Each time I thought I'd lost her Her gaze honked upon me once more. Twice in the dark I raced her till I stood where the Shell sign squeaked. I breathed deep that perfume she left. And was glad she helped to destroy me. More and more she floated past in shadows. I was chained to her recurring course. I was faithful. She spoke to me Lowering for once the window of cold Glass and we were there by the roaring sea. She said it wasn't love stinging my face But only the pure cars of America that Were dragging the main, looking for fools Who want to hold even the lights of Main Street, and the sweetness of a face.
<> They were strange and tall; They were quiet ones. They loved me well. They were brave, They had narrow faces; And narrow's the grave In the strange places. They had sad eyes And long hands. One of them lies In the strange sands. One of them drifts In the crowded sea; The cold foam lifts His memory. One had a heart Like birds flying; Their song was part Of him, curving, crying. One was the land's Like a tall tree, Blown in the winds, Rooted, free. Music was bread To them, and meat; Now they are dead Well can they eat. One is the sea's, One is the land's  The sad eyes, The narrow hands.
Two thousand cigarettes. A hundred miles from wall to wall. An eternity and a half of vigils blanker than snow. Tons of words old as the tracks of a platypus in the sand. A hundred books we didn't write. A hundred pyramids we didn't build. Sweepings. Dust. Bitter as the beginning of the world. Believe me when I say it was beautiful.
I swear to the Lord I still can't see Why Democracy means Everybody but me. I swear to my soul I can't understand Why Freedom don't apply To the black man. I swear, by gum, I really don't know Why in the name of Liberty You treat me so. Down South you make me ride In a Jim Crow car. From Los Angeles to London You spread your color bar. Jim Crow Army, And Navy, too  Is Jim Crow Freedom the best I can expect from you? I simply raise these questions Cause I want you to state What kind of a world We're fighting to create. If we're fighting to create A free world tomorrow, Why not end  Old Jim Crow's sorrow?
<> A mate beside me; we will venture down A deep, full river when the sky above Is shut of the sun; spoilers are we; Thick-coated; no dog's tooth can bite at our veins  With ears and eyes of poachers; deep-earthed ones Turned hunters: let him slip past, The little vole, my teeth are on an edge For the King-fish of the River! I hold him up  The glittering salmon that smells of the sea: I hold him up and whistle! Now we go Back to our earth; we will tear and eat Sea-smelling salmon: you will tell the cubs I am the Booty-bringer: I am the Lord Of the River the deep, dark, full, and flowing River!
Bowl that lifts roof and path into one round, road and roof brimming the bowl with living, dying: morning's wide breath relinks patterns on water. Lights in the factory at sun-up, hull lashed to hull at midday. From strictest quantum simmer and along foamy rock probers lean out, finding the next ford in the river. A shuttering of light from behind, grey going grape blue. Though I went on working, the hair on my neck frayed like cable in the museum, flax from the Stone Age. The creamy paint I layed on that man's house, which tarp kept off his cute little Max Ernst bronze, had been mixed to resist dawn shadows, noon shimmers, and now this. Black sheering up while the powerful say,  roofblow from a black root blooming icily, flashing. But even Alexander poured the one full helmet into dust  for a shout can break forth in which any cry wakes to limits, and the drums be uncased in acknowledgment. Though it reach our tongues, it will be spilled, every drop.
A doughnut is no sculpture. Or anything is, and art is theory, the assertion of theory, the performance of the assertion. Theoretical doughnuts (to assert) are conceptually edible: to the abstract gut the abstract calorie. A ten ton concrete doughnut is not a ten ton concrete doughnut. It is an assertion about doughnutry as a condition of the human condition, especially that of people who assert ten ton concrete doughnuts. Put a dot in an infinite plain: it is nowhere. Frame any part of that plain and put your dot inside the frame: you have placed it. Now place a second dot inside: you have drawn the invisible line connecting your two dots. The rest must be learned slowly, but now it can be  &ldquo;and  to live it as if it made a difference, but helpless not to.
The babe insures the teat The hope insures the ray The pot insures the teatray The driver insures the car The mistress insures the pet The housewife insures the carpet The cat insures its purr The model insures her pose The planner insures his purpose The college insures its don The composer insures his key The cart insures the donkey The glutton insures his tum The cow insures her bull The rough insures the tumble The slaver insures his dhow The lawyer insures the  The bride insures her dowry The bank insures its cod The master insures his piece The lover insures his codpiece The merchant insures his wreck The hangman insures the cord The runner insures his record The hand insures the arm The I insures the Me The state insures the army The consumptive insures his cough The shark insures its fin The corpse insures its coffin.
Everywhere you see her, who could have been  Monet's woman with a parasol who's no woman at all but an excuse for wind   passage of light-and-shade we know wind by just as his pond was no pond  but a globe at his feet turning to show how the liquid, dry, go topsy-turvy, how far  sky goes down in water. Like iris, agapanthus waterplants from margins where, tethered  by their cloudy roots, clouds grow underwater and lily-floes, like landing-craft, hover  waiting for departure, she comes at a slant to crosswinds, currents, against shoals of sunlight  set adrift, loans you her reflection. I saw her the other day I don't know where  at a tangent to some evening, to a sadness she never shares. She wavers, like recognition.  Something of yours goes through her, something of hers escapes. To hillbrows, meadows  where green jumps into her skirt, hatbrim shadows blind her. To coast, wind at her heels, on diagonals  as the minute hand on the hour, the hour on the wheel of sunshades. Everywhere you see her.  On beaches, bramble paths, terraces of Edwardian hotels. In antique shops, running her thumb along  napworn velvet. A nail buffer. An owl brooch with two black eyes of onyx. Eyes she fingers.  But usually on a slope. Coming your way.
You peculiar pink stinks been crowdin' On the Sun's LifeLook out! Green Him's home's the last place You should mess withMove it! Shove ass or Off!Watchin' Eye Won't care you're goneWHO is Nothing. But all of it's <> <> Meaning: The stars sing Because it's always all right! So far you've Not been near except when You didn't know. Night's day Was everywhere. No one is Ever separated from every other For then the world would die. And the world does not die! O Glory, Glory of the Light! <>
Let us sing together to our God, Who made all things And Who created time, Who made the sky, and filled it with much light And with the different stars  Who made the sun, for the world's finery: The moon, the grace of night, and all things shining: The sea, the land, the highlands, and the level places, And the deep rivers: The air, whose open distances birds, in their flights, And winds traverse, and showers of rain. O all these things together, God, Our Father, Are marshaled under Thy command: Now, and forever, and never an end to their service, World without end! Their praise is Thy glory. Who, for our salvation, Didst send to earth, to suffer, guiltless, but for our sins, Thine only Son. Thee, Holy Trinity, we pray To rule and guard our souls and bodies And grant us pardon for our sins. Amen. Jubilemus omnes una Deo nostro qui creavit omnia, Per quem condita sunt saecula; Coelum quod plurima luce coruscat, et diversa sidera; Sol mundi schema, noctium decus luna, cunctaque splendentia, Mare, solum, alta, plana et profunda flumina; Aeris ampla spatia: quae discurrunt aves, venti atque pluvia. Haec simul cuncta tibi soli Deo Patri militant, Nunc et in aevum, sine fine, per saecula: Laus eorum tua gloria: Qui pro salute nostra Prolem unicam, Pati in terra misisti sine culpa, sed ob nostra delicta. Te, sancta Trinitas, precamur ut corpora nostra et corda regas et proteges et donas peccatorum veniam. Amen.
With her buskins tipped with dew, Came a fair, enchanting fay, Tiptoeing the forest through; Who was it but smiling May? Wide she waved her sylph-like arms, As with Dian's grace she ran, Laden with a thousand charms. Then to urge her plea began: Lilies, lilies! come, wake up! Ring your dainty, perfumed bells. Hasten! yellow buttercup! Rouse! throw off Dame Winter's spells. Sweet-faced pansies, wake from dreams! Raise your melancholy eyes. They are veiled too long, it seems; 'Tis no time for reveries. Come shy violets, and ye, Bonnie daisies! why so late? Look! the sunbeams kiss the lea, Do not longer drowse and wait! Ay! the Sunshine is my knight Who has lavished all his gold For you laggards. What a plight That ye grasp not wealth untold! Now she stayed her speech to shed Fom her curved horn nectar rare, On each willing, waiting head; Then resumed her wistful prayer. Swallows, robins, orioles! Tender thrush of liquid lay, Why not here? the breeze-harp rolls Far, inspiring tones to-day. Bobolink, O tarry not! See! the twigs are edged with green; In the meadow there's a spot Dear unto thy heart, I ween. Doves from out your downy nest, Coo, O coo a matin soft; Just a hint of life's unrest Echoes through your music oft. Lark! I languish for thy note; Where in hiding may'st thou be? With thy silver-cadenced throat Lead the Springtime's minstrelsy. Flow'rets, flow'rets, warblers, haste! April came with languid call; Not a moment can ye waste! Wake ye! wake ye! wake ye all!
<> Was it my mother? our mother? In the dream it was a blessing or a key she brought, a message. Was it H.D.'s frail script? It was she, I thought, but the sign was of another. It was a help (for my mind is in great trouble) to receive the letter. But I was cold, lying in the narrow bed, naked. When did I lie there so? The first light of morning came in over me, a cold thin wave where nerves shrank back from the bruise. Who gave me the note? Only I accuse myself of lying here in the cold, shaking in the drafts of light, hugging to the scant cover. For I have lost heart, my mind is divided.
&lsquo;It's Spoon River&rsquo;, he said, looking past things At refractions of marble, swinging in chains of light. &lsquo;And if I could tell you, what could I tell you?&rsquo; Best to say nothing, as they were saying nothing; Do nothing, but look at him looking: A head worn into patience, a kind of godhead Hunting for space between judgement and mercy. We turned away from the heat of the graves Where his mother and father lay, his brother, In a dark dream of grass, brightening In a late sun, in a time before time to go From this clock-stopped time of gold and edges. Was it playing God? Each to his own omniscience, Which was denied. Did he call for resurrection, His head a stoneyard where a lid thrown back Set Billy Brumpton harnessing his mare again, With wisps of hay and cooking-smells at corners, The sound of old money arguing at market? But Spoon River, with its hanging judges And women taken in adultery? He had nothing to say to this town in its water-lights, Its blobbed flowers dying in handfuls. &lsquo;If I told you their stories, it would only be lies. We shall leave all that for the Recording Angel.&rsquo; No locks on the gates. As I turned back with him The light grew confident, then magisterial. What could be said? To whom could we say it? Their lives reached for his keeping; his unmoved eyes Gathered their names as a child gathers in secrets, To hold something in trust for the trusted silence.
Cabaret, cabaret! That's where ma man an' me go. Cabaret, cabaret! That's where we go,  Leaves de snow outside An' our troubles at de door. Jazz band, jazz band! Ma man an' me dance. When I cuddles up to him No other gal's got a chance. Baby, O, Baby, I'm midnight mad. If ma daddy didn't love me It sho would be sad. If he didn't love me I'd go away An' dig me a grave this very day. Blues ... blues! Blue, blue, blues! I'd sho have them blues.
is a kind of blindness: blinded by the sun and blinded in the shade in a vague abstractedness to leaf  like a library of words heard dimly or forgotten  writing in the sun is what would make re-entering a room as cool, hushed, as walking into sleep if sleep were a marble void on the threshold of cathedrals. For a moment it seemed easier to walk towards the park purposeless than to take my life in hand, become, if only for an instant, someone writing in the sun when one instant of imagining walking into people's prayers might be answered with another and another.
Without him many of us would have never happened But would have gone on being Georgians or worse; We all recall how he galloped into verse On Skelton's nag and easily reopened Eighteenth-century prosody like a can of worms, And there like Alice on a checkerboard Careened through Marx and Freud and Kierkegaard Dazzled and dazzling all the ideas and forms, And camped out in the United States to wrinkle Like an Indian squaw to await the Nobel Prize And study savages with paleface eyes And sit on Oxford Dictionaries and rankle. God bless this poet who took the honest chances; God bless the live poets whom his death enhances.
&lsquo;The things my mother made I'll never see again: Potted beef, Lincolnshire fashion, flavoured with mace. Food of the Gods. Melted butter on it. Marvellous. Give all the pates in the world for it. My mother was super-marvellous. She came from a refined and educated home And found herself married to a man who was neither. She said: &ldquo;Every one of these children Is going as far up the educational ladder as they can go,&rdquo; And pushed them till they did. By Scholarship, County Scholarship, County Major Scholarship, We shall raise the wind  Even if it comes out of savings winter coats. My father became an acute alcoholic. Very serious indeed. I spent morning after morning trailing him, Deterring him from going into pubs. Oh, it was a rum time. He got money, and used to hide it in the garden, But always knew how to bring half-pound slabs Of butterscotch home for the children. Broke it up with little hammers. Mother's kind of heroism. When she was quite old her eighties  Tommy arranged for her to go to classes, University Extension Classes poetry. She wrote an account of a local bazaar In heroic couplets. She took vast pleasure in this. She said: &ldquo;I shall give this up. Roger would understand me going to Bridge Parties; He would not understand this.&rdquo; I learnt two things: To discount nine-tenths of what I read About the ills of women in bygone days, And that you could have a family at the mercy Of mortal illness and bankruptcy, And, given the right people and the right spirit, It could be gorgeously happy. And she was rewarded. The children turned out diligent, and clever. Her sisters all married professional men. One of them said: &ldquo;Kate is the only one of us who's got nothing, And the only one of us who has everything.&rdquo; I know that the answer was the simple word &ldquo;Love&rdquo;.&rsquo;
Those houses are too square, those roads too straight, And the trees, though old, look planted to conceal Some sheltered institution hospital Or army base. We find the visitors' gate: A car-park conifered as a cemetery, Well-ordered, clean. You'd know it miles away. Now, like all guilty secrets, it unmasks Its human face: a shabby hall set out With coffee, tea, as for a village fete; Familiar transactions, social tasks In a world removed from all we could transact; And people round us trying to connect The outside past &lsquo;Do you remember?&rsquo; to this, The present, inside. Lives have raced ahead On different tracks, with so much left unsaid, And now unsayable, that we dismiss The normal words: gossip, solemnity Seem to affront the occasion equally. &lsquo;It won't be long.&rsquo; The parting sounds inane. &lsquo;We'd better let you out,&rsquo; the warders smile: The trees, of course, were planted to console. They fail. The landscape opens once again  A low green wood, shut pubs, a water tower  And freedom, if that is what this is, tastes sour.
The boat rounded a bend and Urirotstock towered in its snows. &ldquo;Canton Uri! <> sang out the farmer native of Altdorf and thrillingly today his memory has pierced my torpor: please it God that I will once cry for my towering city such a cry I heard at Urirotstock. Freedom of course was in it, and quixotic labor endured as a thing of course to live among those snows, and fatherly anxious affection for his pretty daughter. There is the Tell Marker on the right! The Alps stand up around us and behind, and worst in front, whose name is Obstacle. Everything says, This world is not for cowards. Everything is quiet on the lake that is shining awestruck in my mind's eye, and everything says, This world is not for thieves  as softly we steam into Fl&uuml;ellen.
<> the out's in  the wise surprised, all going coming, begun undone. Hence the fool dances in endless happiness. A circling with snake-tail in mouth  what the head was looked  what backward is, then guess. Either way, it will stay.
Women have loved before as I love now; At least, in lively chronicles of the past  Of Irish waters by a Cornish prow Or Trojan waters by a Spartan mast Much to their cost invaded here and there, Hunting the amorous line, skimming the rest, I find some woman bearing as I bear Love like a burning city in the breast. I think however that of all alive I only in such utter, ancient way Do suffer love; in me alone survive The unregenerate passions of a day When treacherous queens, with death upon the tread, Heedless and wilful, took their knights to bed.
Business as usual, no doubt, where we take our tea and pay respects to bones of the ancient whale. Through the glass of a yellow room we watch the gentle action in a courtyard the couple from Japan who spoon yoghurt from plastic cups, then photograph each other. You leave me to walk the wooden sidewalk, wander through fake shops constructed so we can get the feel of how it was just off the ship in a new land, one hundred years ago. I'd gladly sign for steerage, gladly sail the Cape. Upon arrival I'd work to clear the backblocks, hack the scrub, become the founding father who leaves his heirs to pick fruit from trees he brought from England, even now shear sheep descended from that year. With a refill on my tea I have three halves of cheese on toast, gaze at a serving girl who might have sailed the stormy Cape with me, if I had met her back in London, 1852. Then you come back to ask if I might want to see the Maori dance called  and yells and all that be challenged with a spear, beg entrance to their fortress like some pioneer of old. But I prefer to sit, still longing to immigrate, sail around the Cape and start our dynasty. I sit all afternoon  first here, then there outside the glass and in. I find my spot beneath five twisted limbs of a monkey puzzle tree. I glow with a strange repose. You and I are not in crisis at this moment, nor does some deadline loom. Time out of mind, they call it. Slow shadows cross the park. The winding river chills. School boys and girls skip past, blue caps upon their heads. And still I sit as if to puzzle out our world. Then you come back to tell me the ferocious Maori chief throws down red blossoms and you, the pioneer, are welcome to his fort if you politely pick them up. But if you don't, or hesitate, you're dead from just one blow.
<> Flittering in the newspapers and drinking beer with lawyers And amid the educated men of the clubs you have been getting an earful of speech from trained tongues. Take an earful from me once, go with me on a hike Along sand stretches on the great inland sea here And while the eastern breeze blows on us and the rest- less surge Of the lake waves on the breakwater breaks with an ever fresh monotone, Let us ask ourselves: What is truth? what do you or I know? How much do the wisest of the world's men know about where the massed human procession is going? You have heard the mob laughed at? I ask you: Is not the mob rough as the mountains are rough? And all things human rise from the mob and relapse and rise again as rain to the sea?
Not the Polish physicist asking for help with busses, he a new trusty tugging on his long leash, but a Palestinian who swung against me from a hand strap downhill past the leaning tower where tales fix Nero during the fire, blurring whole eras, crooning  out of all those identities jostled on their way through, nameless, this is one I have tried to name when the face even of a master ebbed across the interrogated dark and this one hung there, like its own star, over no ground. The Tiber synagogue, thudding helicopters tilting away from it, had just been bombed. Better a bus than the street ... The squares past midnight, tame as the moon, lull with their amplitude: when I swung out to scan the slab of high chalk inscribing those from the neighborhood swept up in the last massacre, a car shot in whipping the inches behind me. Fading radio ... But it will arrive, the longed-for vanishing-point prick through, far from the tracked place or haunted wall, will finally quiver out from a past crushed till it must turn future and twist living through some inconceivable knot. That spring after the quake which levelled Acre a traveller to Nazareth equally hard-hit went into the church eyes full of ruin, and he heard preludes, swelling chorales, and then he saw the organist leave: a ten-year-old Arab boy. Will it be such a fine inversion next time, would it be scorable, even the dispersals incalculable and the penetration of a jewelled theme to the chance ear from thrusts of air, of tremor.... Face in the dark that stays.
<> We are an admixture of trees and black earth. Sundays come in dark cloth, and all weeks end. Fishing smacks from Hyste to Perth Flatter the sea With its immensity. We plow, we back up the day to breaking. Sackcloth and ashes! Sackcloth and ashes! Not uncomplaining widows on Sunday. Not now. Never now. A woman dashes, Squats in pain, Remains in pain. We are faces blackening windows, Eyes that pass through stone and remember Sands that number us, brisk stars to perceive From the dry-boned November The seed of us, Tremulous.
Tell me more of the eagle, Cotton, And you, black Sly, Tell me how he descended Out of the morning sky. Describe with deepened voice And noble imagery His slowly-falling round Down to the fishy sea. Here was a sovereign sight, Fit for a kinky clan. Tell me again of the point At which the flight began, Say how his heavy wings, Spread on the sun-bronzed air, Turned tip and tip away, Down to the sand, the glare Of the pine trees edging the sand, Dropping in sovereign rings Out of his fiery lair. Speak of the dazzling wings.
This poem began after the wild turkeys walked across our garden in Connecticut. Although, of course the title of this poem suggests something else. The turkeys were the necessary movement the excitement appearing out of nowhere at four in the afternoon and fearlessly walking across the lawn oblivious to all of us who sat watching them  This poem has gone through many drafts it's the easiest and yet the hardest to write  <> as Emily Dickinson wrote. The trick is knowing how much to reveal about the background of a poem and how much to leave out  Memory, as you know, is unreliable  Perhaps the introduction to a poem could turn into another poem
I would bathe myself in strangeness: These comforts heaped upon me, smother me! I burn, I scald so for the new, New friends, new faces, Places! Oh to be out of this, This that is all I wanted  save the new. And you, Love, you the much, the more desired! Do I not loathe all walls, streets, stones, All mire, mist, all fog, All ways of traffic? You, I would have flow over me like water, Oh, but far out of this! Grass, and low fields, and hills, And sun, Oh, sun enough! Out, and alone, among some Alien people!
Whiten, oh, whiten, O clouds of lawn!  Lily-like clouds that whiten above, Now like a dove, and now like a swan, But never, oh, never pass on! pass on!   Never as white as the throat of my love. Blue-black night on the mountain peaks   Oh, not so black as the locks o' my love! Stars that shine through the evening's streaks Over the torrent that flashes and breaks,  Brighter the eyes of my love, my love! Moon in a cloud, as white as snow,  Mist in the vale where the rivulet bounds, Dropping from ledge to ledge below, Turning to gold in the sunset's glow,  Softer and sweeter her footstep sounds. Sound o' May winds in the blossoming trees,  Oh, not so sweet as her laugh that rings; Song o' wild birds on the morning breeze, Birds and brooks and murmur o' bees,  Sweeter her voice when she laughs or sings. The rose o' my heart is she; my dawn!  My star o' the east, my moon above! My soul takes ship for the Avalon Of her heart of hearts, and shall sail on  Till it anchors safe in its haven of love.
Others, I am not the first, Have willed more mischief than they durst: If in the breathless night I too Shiver now, 'tis nothing new. More than I, if truth were told, Have stood and sweated hot and cold, And through their reins in ice and fire Fear contended with desire. Agued once like me were they, But I like them shall win my way Lastly to the bed of mould Where there's neither heat nor cold. But from my grave across my brow Plays no wind of healing now, And fire and ice within me fight Beneath the suffocating night.
The man struck from the woman  That is the crime. As the armies grow So gathers the guilt, So bloom the perversions, So flower the fears, So breed the deep cruelties and the secretive hurts. And each, the man and the woman, Too much alone, Age and grow cold. Let the man touch the woman. Now the husband dreams of the wife, Recalling her clear singing and her solitary grace. We are not whole. And she? Sadly apart she stirs in sleep and makes moan, Turns and makes moan, Needing the all-encompassing arm That now is not there.
As when some cold volcano will begin To shake off slumber it is buried in, And like a lusty Titan hiccough thunder Till earth for miles around is rent asunder, While lavas roar, a monstrous avalanche, To gulp up every farmhouse, fence and branch; As when Vesuvius hurls many a crag Amid such billowing vapor, cinders, slag, Until you wonder if infernal regions Were disembowelled with their flaming legions,  So now there is a land wherein a vast Volcano spews up an ancient past  Coughs up a steaming Styx does not abate Disgorging, from a hundred fissures, hate ... (What deep and inner contradictions sent Destruction gushing up from every vent?) From what abyss, what subterranean deep, Do those barbaric epochs, thought asleep, Burst and explode with poisonous hissing?... Gall Of malice, pitching flames of terror fall, Mixed with the fragments of the Middle Ages, Scattered afar, as the volcano rages.... The fumes grow thick and acrid. None can see For all the lurid smoke of bigotry. With all the tumult of the shrieking, which Swells from the tortured under burning pitch, Under the pumice and the sulphur's dread, You'd think that Phlegethon were vomited From Hades over houses, garden-nooks, Over temples, over libraries with books, Over the ambushed masses, over all!  So thus, within this Nazi Etna's pall, How many a city, as the lavas creep, Chokes like another Pompeii, covered deep: How many a sparkling city must become Another buried Herculaneum?
In Russia there were three students, Chaim, Baruch, and Meyer. &ldquo;As Maimonides says,&rdquo; said Meyer. &ldquo;Speaking of the Flood,&rdquo; said Baruch. &ldquo; In Spring when the birch trees shine like crystal and the light is so clear that a butterfly makes dark strokes in the air, there came three students of Hebrew and the girls from the button factory  Dvoira, Malka, Rifkele... a mystery, a fragrance, and a torment to the scholars. They couldn't have kept a goat, for the milk, much less the fastidious girls of our province. One night, the red star rising, a beautiful dream came to Meyer, a  and he heard a voice say, &ldquo;Meyer, and Lermontov, and Pushkin.&rdquo; Dark roofs of Volhynia, do you remember Meyer who went to the University and later he joined the Communist Party? Last night I dreamed of Meyer.... He turned his head and smiled. With his hand he made a sign... then his features changed, he was mournful, and I heard him say in a clear voice, &ldquo;Beware! These men killed Meyer.&rdquo;
is thinking hard. It was lain in the shape of Scotland, now it's been edged to a female torso. It knows it is made of turf rectangles which once were folded over like thick books. That would make the lorry it came in like a library. It knows such things, but can't imagine the field it came from. It can't remember the weight of cattle, and fantasises it was stolen from a famous Scottish golf course. It would smile at the faces of those early morning golfers but it hasn't got a head. Much of the Western Highlands have now been covered in clover. Dandelions root like nipples over Aberdeen. The frost does not discriminate between its regions. One time it snowed: this aided concentration. The lawn wants to know when it began: was it when its different editions started to knit? Or when the population arrived in hard casings? (The ladybirds, it decides, were volkswagens.) Was it the first massacre when the Mower of the Scots made it suffer in strips? Or was it the weight of women's breasts pressing into it all summer? It could take months to sort this out.
I rage at my own image in the glass That's so unlike myself that when you praise it It is as though you praised another, or even Mocked me with praise of my mere opposite; And when I wake towards morn I dread myself, For the heart cries that what deception wins Cruelty must keep; therefore be warned and go If you have seen that image and not the woman. I have raged at my own strength because you have loved it. If you are no more strength than I am beauty I had better find a convent and turn nun; A nun at least has all men's reverence And needs no cruelty. I have heard one say That men have reverence for their holiness And not themselves. Say on and say That only God has loved us for ourselves, But what care I that long for a man's love? When all works that have From cradle run to grave From grave to cradle run instead; When thoughts that a fool Has wound upon a spool Are but loose thread, are but loose thread; When cradle and spool are past And I mere shade at last Coagulate of stuff Transparent like the wind, I think that I may find A faithful love, a faithful love.
He couldnt open the wine, drank the brandy. A list of bad angels from the book of Enoch. Waters of the sea. Neva.  <> <> Shot seven times in the spine he staggers through the courtyard looking for a fire or a map of Egypt or hem of the Virgin's robe or a new blue suit. Knives reach up to cut him, cyanide kills the rats in his body. Clubbed down to his knees at last he remembers a song Holy mother meek &amp; mild come protect your dying child. The angels wait for him where the river thaws, months away. They are patient. They all have corkscrews, napkins, each wine inside its appropriate glass. Room left on the menu they include remorse. Or the death of Rasputin. Across the frozen river naked girls walk backwards. Any minute they will be here. Or there. The bells ring. The confused testimony of his assassins fills his ears.  Someone chops a hole in the ice &amp; dumps him in. He says something about love, then dies. No one hears it. He does not understand it himself.
Out of that smoky faced and ruined town Where common pain is washed out on the margins Of open drains, in narrow wretched alleys Fumes of night soil slowly decomposing, Poisoned air and stagnant water stand Commingled in unlit cellars of the damned, While clerks with starved looks chart the flow Of profit in thick black ledger books, Red lined accounts blur before their tired eyes Like blowing rain in the face of some exposed Passenger traveling into a storm Through a night raging with apprehensive Prefiguration of further black weather  On my rocking perch watching the world blown Over and blown under, trees and houses torn From ground and toppling down the Exeter Stage plows west into the hurricane
I listen to the echoes of John Jones crying: &lsquo;God is not good,&rsquo; and of his wife correcting him: &lsquo;Hush, John.&rsquo; &lsquo;The cuckoo returns to Gwrtheyrn, contradicting John Jones, within its voice bluebells tolling over the blue sea. There is work here still, quarrying for an ancient language to bring it to the light from under the years&rsquo; dust covering it. Men, with no palate for fine words, they helped them down with their sweat, spitting them out later in what served them for prayer. Was it for this God numbered their days? Where once pick- axes would question, now only the stream ticks, telling a still time to listeners at their text-books. Turning its back on the world, contemplating without boredom unchanging horizons this place knows a truth, for here is the resurrection of things. One after one they arise in answer to names they are called by, standing around, shining, by brief graves from whose hold willing hands have released them.
1An interchange of flutes. 2quickly / swiftly 3The man starts to walk up the mountain. The woman joins him halfway up the slope. They glide along like flying. 4Upside down. Then downside up. 5THE BIRDS PRECISELY BIRDS  they are formationless with nobody to tell the limits, therefore untold, burnt each finds a corner of the house to buzz, to slam against, the curtain fast descends this ends bird presences.
Once, the Doctor spoke to me at length of stars and prognostications, how, when we observe the waxing of the Moon, everything cognate to her nature marrow in bones and in trees, flesh of the river mussel increases also. He told of tides and how the ocean is affixed as with a chain to moonlight. I think it must be different in the Cave, where no light penetrates. There, I have lost hours, whole cycles of the Sun. At Star Chamber, I control the spheres  a lantern hung just-so will produce the night sky as if seen from a gorge; wobble it, and a comet, smoky, pestilent, streaks across the Ether.
Eating, being eaten,  parts of me watch, parts of me burn, rarely a clear blue flame without a sputtering of questions:  why now, why here, why the Down's syndrome in the genes of happiness,  the dead twin's cord of birth noosed around his brother's neck,  a favourite dog eating puppies in the garden, why the fall into bliss on a cloudy afternoon? Under the grey rains of June,  in the black patience of stone elephants, were the watchers there with me, being born over and over, tearing  each time through a waterbed paradise, the original ocean of milk, gills for lungs, the whole body  a sucking at the nipple, a past perfect of two in one, my head's soft crown bathed in mother's blood,  wearing tatters of attachments, bursting into the cruelties of earthly light, infected air?
Mysteriously swollen glands at ten. I was on complete bed rest, the nurses wrote in my chart which I read &ldquo;seems content with bed rest&rdquo; I read books (school, comic, anything) all day long, uncomplaining. At ten thirty at night to the tin heartbeat of a radio in the imperfect hotel quiet of the hospital I got out of bed to dance the Mashed Potatoes, furiously. Down the hall death was murmuring through the heavy mucus of a child's throat.
Throughout the afternoon I watched them there, Snow-fairies falling, falling from the sky, Whirling fantastic in the misty air, Contending fierce for space supremacy. And they flew down a mightier force at night, As though in heaven there was revolt and riot, And they, frail things had taken panic flight Down to the calm earth seeking peace and quiet. I went to bed and rose at early dawn To see them huddled together in a heap, Each merged into the other upon the lawn, Worn out by the sharp struggle, fast asleep. The sun shone brightly on them half the day, By night they stealthily had stol'n away. And suddenly my thoughts then turned to you Who came to me upon a winter's night, When snow-sprites round my attic window flew, Your hair disheveled, eyes aglow with light. My heart was like the weather when you came, The wanton winds were blowing loud and long; But you, with joy and passion all aflame, You danced and sang a lilting summer song. I made room for you in my little bed, Took covers from the closet fresh and warm, A downful pillow for your scented head, And lay down with you resting in my arm. You went with Dawn. You left me ere the day, The lonely actor of a dreamy play.
'Tis spring; come out to ramble  The hilly brakes around, For under thorn and bramble  About the hollow ground  The primroses are found. And there's the windflower chilly  With all the winds at play, And there's the Lenten lily  That has not long to stay  And dies on Easter day. And since till girls go maying  You find the primrose still, And find the windflower playing  With every wind at will,  But not the daffodil, Bring baskets now, and sally  Upon the spring's array, And bear from hill and valley  The daffodil away  That dies on Easter day.
And that is the largest battleship in the world, I said. And see how small it really is. Isn't that encouraging? She pointed her head toward the drinking fountain, but was having none of it. A dog from the mental ward hopped over her. We had driven all the way to Surf City for some peace and, it's not as though it eluded us so much as it did circle us. The pelicans were on display. They did pelican-like dives into the surf and came up wanting bit parts in a movie other than ours. We were surprisingly graceful and called Pest Control. That whole day was like a dream leaking into our satchel. It was stained permanently, but so attractive we couldn't have designed it better, and we knew nothing about design. The battleship seemed stalled forever, or it was a little intimidated by its own reputation. Whatever the case, we held the idea of a torpedo gingerly in our minds and meandered without launching it. Most of the natives were under house arrest. They wore ankle bracelets and watched us from their windows or monitors. We couldn't go any farther than this. We were touring our Armed Forces here and there. Some of the ammo felt moldy. The Officers, though, were made of steel, soft and pliable, like stuffed animals. They wet their beds that seemed to be the unifying principle. But what did we know? We were rank amateurs. We were poseurs of the worst sort. We were out of our league. We belonged in little league uniforms, but we couldn't afford them, and our sponsors were idiots and dunces and drifters and no-count amalgamated mud merchants. This left us free of debt and free of riches, which can be so heavy to transport. We were airy and free and broke and lost figure skaters or trigger fish, whatever. And whenever one of the ships felt like sinking we just picked up magazines and pretended to read about something else, like a migraine headache discovered still pounding inside a 10,000-year-old snowman holding up the North Pole. Incredible! we'd say. And, who could believe in that? 35,000 tons of history, going, going so long. Next, we are going to visit planets of the solar system, like Burma and Senegal. But the Department of Housing and Urban Development says there is heartache and neuralgia starting to blossom there, but also hydroponics is being discovered. We have decided to travel by hydroplane, though, sadly, there is no water anywhere as yet.
Wind mills churn on Windy City's rooftopsAntennae collecting electric above thick-loamed gardens on Playboy Tower Merchandise Mart's compost privies supply nightsoil for Near North Side's back Gardens Cabbages, celery &amp; cucumbers sprout in Mayor Daley's frontyard rich with human waste  Bathtub beer like old days Backyard Mary Jane like old days, Sun reflectors gather heat in rockpile collectors under apartment walls Horses graze in Parks &amp; streets covered with grass Mafia Dons shovel earth &amp; bury Cauliflower leaves Old gangsters &amp; their sons tending grapevines
The black clouds swell up around the setting sun Making a distant elm conspicuous, Its rosy domination like the claw On a garden rake held up Before the face and through which The blinking leaf fires of late autumn play. The blue sheafs Of tree shadows fall across the doorway where A man and a woman are speaking, looking at their feet, In the yard full of leaves. He repeats a simple sentence. The long sleeves Of her gray sweater will swallow her hands As she dances a little in place, cold and impatient! But they are both in pain. A wet December day has made their naked bodies linger Like red berries in the memory. It ends over white papers with a stranger Who awards the man two chairs, who awards the woman A sofa and mirror. They begin to walk away, in opposite directions, Kicking up leaves tears down their faces ... This farewell was both simple and difficult. The incalculable Ditches in the field below their cold house Are touched with mist; ice Forms in the stubble.  And the slumbering ruse of early winter Points a long finger in the direction Of our exile: a passage that's all so clear Taking us over the horizon into atmosphere.
granted the all saving our young kiss only must unexist,solemnly and per rules apparelling its soullessness by lonely antics of ridiculous molecules) nakedest(aiming for hugely the ignorant most precise essential flame never which waked)&amp; perfectingly We dive out of tinying time (into supreme Now: feeling memory shrink from such brief selves as fiercely seek findingly new textures of actual cool stupendous is nor may truth opening encompass true) while your contriving fate,my sharpening life are(behind each no)touching every yes
Just for this afternoon the traffic patterns polish the primordial ways, so that thinking this thought is almost like driving home, kind of numb all-over. I am so crusty and rusty and dusty from driving the obvious ramp, that safe and silly sort-of drifting toward a state of perfect adjustment and not thinking about a thing. These are simply flawed traffic patterns, and these cars are driven into the next century like satisfied impermanent pigs, and in their stately mission they are only getting older. The cloverleaves are folding. There is an X on this window, almost exquisite, the slight madness, kiss and forgiveness. I must turn over a new automobile. This day reminds me of all the others, and the virgin lanes looming just out of reach, the particular gaping maw of this day dripping in slow or no motion like a nocount accountant taxing himself beyond reason, strictly speaking in the tollhouse of grief like smoke joining the World Sensorium for just a moment. Aug! The One! This new power is very great! I must buy one of these new automobiles, upward and away!
This deathwatch, this gazing over the lights reflected on dead water, these city lights, up to the cloud-nimbus con- centrating the city's sickly deathglow ... Long and too long I have reasoned with you, cajoled you, pleasured you with song or taunted you with acerbic rhymes. My long years! The wind of the end of November makes the twisted, half-dead, spind- ly cedar only grip more in- transigently with its barky roots the alkaline rock- strewn shore, while leaves and bits of twigs and paper, this vast rub- bish, our lives, stream away and away. The lights shiver. I'd be cold if I could say the word for cold, but my voice is windblown backward into the voids of streets. I could never stand visiting the zoo, hell created for my friends; now it seems the only re- fuge. Yet where? In exile the cag- es are broken. Incre- ments of light, every shift of the wind. Dead souls! Yes, we are. We shiver in our nonexist- ence, our rejection. Far and near, early and late, we tried our best to belong, some of us, maybe the best of us; never enough. Then come, you randy whatsit, seize us all, fling us out there among the false lights, I who am old, my son David who is young: we know you well enough to know you do not care whether we care or not, and so we choose not to, now or ever.
Ask me no more fame and sorrow how it runs how bravery is lost in the hands of the water It was a flight broad as a garment wide as the mouth-resounding sigh legs on a strip of land halved by a strip of sea Who was it running day before yesterday to the neighbors <> a hedonist of storms now frees The white roots find the wings warm folded when you wake next to me windows slant water hidden coast Hear our bird the common song it ties us hair-hair like a child absorbing hours Delta and Delta to the touch Nile streaming  Open of opens which sun sings? which sea stiff-nippled curly measures? Embrace me gloss permeable sound broad and again tightening convulsive as the tuber walls collapse in and then out Palpable trembling heavily I lean against your eyelids as your wish Friend of mine friend of mine hope earth place light least evil moist in the loom of mind palmshade and waterlily love a tongued kiss saturates the eye See the rose-ocean? the sea a herd? I turn to you and cherries spill their blood notes to the teeth and fill and fall and sail a call so freshly loved freshly squeezed
First of the insect choir, in the spring  We hear his faint voice fluttering in the grass, Beneath some blossom's rosy covering,  Or frond of fern, upon a wildwood pass. When in the marsh, in clamorous orchestras, The shrill hylodes pipe; when, in the haw's  Bee-swarming blooms, or tasseling sassafras, Sweet threads of silvery song the sparrow draws,  Bow-like, athwart the vibrant atmosphere,   Like some dim dream low-breathed in slumber's ear,    We hear his  All summer long the mellowing meadows thrill  To his blithe music. Be it day or night, Close gossip of the grass, on field and hill  He serenades the silence with delight: Silence, that hears the melon slowly split With ripeness; and the plump peach, hornet-bit,  Loosen and fall; and everywhere the white, Warm, silk-like stir of leafy lights that flit  As breezes blow; above which, loudly clear,   Like joy who sings of life and has no fear,    We hear his  Then in the autumn, by the waterside,  Leaf-huddled; or along the weed-grown walks, He dirges low the flowers that have died,  Or with their ghosts holds solitary talks. Lover of warmth, all day above the click And crunching of the sorghum-press, through thick  Sweet steam of juice; all night when, white as chalk, The hunter's-moon hangs o'er the rustling rick,  Within the barn 'mid munching cow and steer,   Soft as a memory the heart holds dear,    We hear his  Kinsman and cousin of the Fa&euml;ry Race,  All winter long he sets his sober mirth,  That brings good-luck to many a fireplace,   To folk-lore song and saga of the hearth. Between the back-log's bluster and the slim High twittering of the kettle, sounds that hymn  Home-comforts, when, outside, the starless earth Is icicled in every laden limb,   Defying frost and all the sad and sere,   Like love that dies not and is always near,    We hear his
Peace was the promise: this house in the vineyard, Under the height of the great tree Loosing its leaves on the autumn air. East lie the mountains; Level and smooth lie the fields of vines. Now on this day in the slope of the year, Over the wine and the sheaf of grain, We shape our hands to the sign, the symbol, Aware of the room, the sun in the sky, The earnest immaculate rhythm of our blood, As two will face in the running light, Ritual born of the heavy season, And see suddenly on all sides reality, Vivid again through the crust of indifference, Waken under the eye. East lie the mountains, Around us the level length of the earth; And this house in the vines, Our best year, Golden grain and golden wine, In autumn, the good year falling south.
there are mobs &amp; strangers in us who scream of the women wanted and will get as if the women are ours for the taking. our mothers, sisters, wives and daughters ceased to be the women men wantwe think of them as loving familymusic &amp; soulbright wondermints. they are not locker room talk not the hunted lust ordirty cunt burnin hoes. bright wondermints are excludedby association as blood &amp; heartbone &amp; memory &amp; we will destroy a rapist's knee caps, &amp; write early grave on his thoughts to protect them. it will do us large to recall when the animal in us rises that all women are someone's mother, sister, wife or daughter and are not fruit to be stolen when hungry. a significant few of their fathers, brothers, husbands, sons and growing strangers are willing to unleash harm on the earth and spill blood in the eyes of maggots in running shoes who do not know the sounds of birth or respect the privacy of the human form.
this month's victim was brought in by the threat of death, threats against her family, the route of her children's walk to school repeated to her over the phone, her husband pummeled by two men dressed as joggers, men she's seen before, in her rear-view mirror, at stop lights, standing outside her office reading <> in Kansas now, with a new life, something that matches the flatness of the land. like so many others who have gone before her, she's there to forget, to forget, to forget. even she finds this new woman strange; she smokes cigarettes and knits sweaters as if it were somebody else's idea.
fifty chemises scattered on the beach an 8 powder hornnecklace worn by an inferior chief in a woman's stocking cap a victory feast &wblank;  the second temple was not like the first the chief uttered in the nightmare words to show the hunters the way the otter sprang ahead of them its ownswimming presentness
&lsquo;Would you care to explain Why they fight for your books With already too many Tight-packed on their shelves (Many hundreds of thousands Or hundreds of millions) As though you had written Those few for themselves?&rsquo; &lsquo;In reply to your query: I wrote for one reason And only one reason (That being my way): Not for fame, not for glory, Nor yet for distraction, But oddly enough I had something to say.&rsquo; &lsquo;So you wrote for one reason? Be damned to that reason! It may sound pretty fine But relinquish it, pray! There are preachers in pulpits And urchins in playgrounds And fools in asylums And beggars in corners And drunkards in gutters And bandits in prisons With all the right reasons For something to say.&rsquo;
A pondering frog looks out from my eyes: dark-red, veiled blue, plums roll to the center of a bowl and at close horizon water-towers hump and perch. Leap frog, to a lake: leaves support the lilies, water holds erect the long, strong stems, reflects gleaming rosy petals, pollen-yellow lily-buds, clouds lilac-tinted and dissolving. Back to the plums  eggs in a blue nest the squat peaked assembly of towers. What is it? An accord. Break out, frog, sing, you who don't know anything about anything. &ldquo;To dance without moving&rdquo; shall be your burden.
<>  The winds of Morn danced with them, oh, and all the sylphs of air: I saw their ribboned roses blow, their gowns of daffodils,  As over eyes of sapphire tossed the wild gold of their hair. I saw the summer of their feet imprint the earth with dew,  And all the wildflowers open eyes in joy and wonderment: I saw the sunlight of their hands waved at each bird that flew,  And all the birds, as with one voice, to their wild love gave vent. &ldquo;And, oh!&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;how fair you are! how fair! how very fair!   Oh, leap, my heart; and laugh, my heart! as laughs and leaps the Dawn! Mount with the lark and sing with him and cast away your care!  For love and life are come again and night and sorrow gone!&rdquo; I saw the acolytes of Eve, the mystic sons of Night,  Come pacing through the ancient wood in hoods of hodden-grey; Their sombre cloaks were pinned with stars, and each one bore a light,  A moony lanthorn, and a staff to help him on his way. I heard their mantles rustle by, their sandals' whispering, sweep,  And saw the wildflowers bow their heads and close their lovely eyes: I saw their shadows pass and pass, and with them Dreams and Sleep,  Like children with their father, went, in dim and ghostly guise. &ldquo;And, oh!&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;how sad you are! how sad! how wondrous sad!  Oh, hush, my heart! be still, my heart! and, like the dark, be dumb! Be as the wild-rose there that dreams the perfect hour it had,  And cares not if the day be past and death and darkness come.&rdquo;
In a tobacco trance they genuflect at the elbow to their twisting god In hazy sacrament pungent as lust they blink with disregard at up-front pilgrims to the john &amp; think: &ldquo;An infidel the Lord of Tar has spared this aching ecstasy. Ah, better death than breath!&rdquo; If it must always begin with the captain turning off the no-smoking sign then why not end with the one-lunged traveler the little old man on the aisle in seat 62F who when he hears &ldquo;Please extinguish all smoking materials,&rdquo; pushes to the floor the blanket that's been smoldering in his lap and tromps upon it two-footed while the congregation overwhelms him with volleys of amens &amp; hallelujahs?
At Gringley-on-the-hill, North Notts, Mr. King struggles with a bell. A vicar and two visitors glance, and a child pulls hands in a crib with straw and figurines. My talent has dribbled over into bright catalogues of ways to saunter down a corridor; my book is a marriage to one planet, mostly water, and I must remain faithful. All-night movies in the badlands of the soul. Reel one: In the Basement Sales Area, after stairs, and Hazel said &ldquo;Nobody paints the sea as it should be painted.&rdquo; Reel two: Walking with Tag through Doncaster, meeting his father. Tag is wordless; he bubbles, jibs, spits, says &ldquo;We're going to the cinema&rdquo;, and the crowds. Attacking trees and a wife laughing easily. (Between the cushions and frames of plays, my response is, quite unexpectedly, Easy Chair: Easy Chairing my outlook, Easy Chair historical inevitability, Easy Chair in alone-face and three-piece-suite alignment. My toast, like me, is singed under the grill; I was crisp in Phoenix at two o'clock in the morning, watching aroad, or during that other crackling San Antonio night. Golly, after all this, I am on a corner, a road which I have travelled by double-decker and never walked. Today I am in a car sailing to Bentley, South Yorkshire, five bells, tenor five hundredweights with other persons to ring although the church is not well congregated and the evening service is sung in the vicar's lounge. Jane Wood is not used to the inside work of bob doubles, and Mr. King shouts at her head. The bells are so light and you must ring them carefully. A row of handbells is hung to a &ldquo;wall&rdquo;. You must go gingerly on the bell at Bentley with a girl. Deep mutual human need and shirts.
darling!because my blood can sing and dance(and does with each your least your any most very amazing now or here)let pitiless fear play host to every isn't that's under the spring  but if a look should april me, down isn't's own isn't go ghostly they doubting can turn men's see to stare their faith to how their joy to why their stride and breathing to limp and prove  but if a look should april me, some thousand million hundred more bright worlds than merely by doubting have darkly themselves unmade makes love armies(than hate itself and no meanness unsmaller)armies can immensely meet for centuries and(except nothing)nothing's won  but if a look should april me for half a when,whatever is less alive than neXYYYbegins to yes but if a look should april me (though such as perfect hope can feel only despair completely strikes forests of mind,mountains of soul) quite at the hugest which of his who death is killed dead.Hills jump with brooks: trees tumble out of twigs and sticks;
They talked about their adventures driving through England when they first married, and excursions to China and India. Also they remembered ordinary days pond summers, working on poems together, walking the dog, reading Chekhov aloud. When he praised thousands of afternoon assignations that carried them into bliss and repose on this painted bed, Jane burst into tears and cried, &ldquo;No more fucking. No more fucking!&rdquo;
As much as I'd like to be a jolly, fat old man, skinny I remain no matter what I eat, and jolly I'll never become  though I perfectly understand the reasons for that, the same as prevent me from getting fat. But if I go on living, unlikely as it seems with signs of doom in my hand and symptoms multiplying, I can't think of anything that I would rather do than spend my old age crying  if they allow me to.
A black page of night flutters: dream on or waken, words will spring from darkness now, gold-bright, to fill the hollow mind laid still to hear them, as an iron cup laid on the window-ledge, would fill with rain. Not more alone waking than sleeping, in darkness than in light, yet it is now we can assume an attitude more listening than longing, extend invisible antenn&aelig; towards some intimation, echo, emanation falling slowly like a destined feather that lights at last before the feet of hesitating fear. Not less alone in city than in solitude, at least this time an hour or minute? left between dreaming and action, where the only glitter is the soft gleam of words, affording intimacy with each submerged regret, awakes a new lucidity in pain, so that with day we meet familiar angels that were lately tears and smile to know them only fears transformed.
In come the harps, four grounded wings as of some Cretaceous dragonfly dismembered and shellacked: two black, one cedar-red, one golden brown conveyed on baggage dollies, torn angels positioned one by one al fresco in the sun to be plucked by four dewy girls ordered the way Matisse might have arrayed them: a blonde at the black, a black at the cedar-red an Asian at the golden brown and a pale brunette at the other black. While we sit pampered in the shade out pours the piece I came to grief on: Karl Phillip Emanuel's &ldquo;Solfeggietto.&rdquo; Miss Alexander's spatulate digits stretched my stubby fingers to enforce leaps I couldn't make, little runs through lesser unplayable Bach that defeated me the year I was ten. Parents, nostalgists, drop-ins hush. The harps sing, it is virginal. Karl Phillip two hundred years gone and Miss Alexander misplaced fifty years outside whose window even then as now a cardinal from the pin oak calls
My poems, if poems other than casual entrances into systems, are lulls by which motion going by too fast as in damaging winds slows to assume (forced into the definition of mediating rhythms, sketchy but entangling knots, in this wind tight patterns obstructive and unyielding likely to come down or be hauled off whole, criss-cross trellises in typhoon, say: but bits, strings, swerving (lessening and swelling) elongations that giving to the wind like high water or sails catch a part of it formed into known ways, let go, withstood.
<>  I waited, stupid in my wasted hope,  And felt the winds, beneath the heavens cope,  Stir like the pulse of some vast gradual stream. This was the end. I heard again his scream  Of perfect fear, and felt about me furled  The naked hate of all the living world:   God's eyes looked into mine nor were supreme! The crawling fear had thrust his jaws apart  And fixed his lidless eyes against the wall,  And Death held back the tides within his heart; I cried, &ldquo;For Pity, tell me if she lied!&rdquo;  Then came the hideous simper, and a small  Mute whisper writhed upon his lips and died.
We are the antlers of that white animal That great white animal Asleep under the sea He forgets and dreams so deep he does not Know his whiteness in the sea-black Among the plants of night. His antlers have legs and arms.Our heads together being joined Journey tonight, dreamed in his ocean. Where we lie afterwards, smoke of our dreams Goes coiling up, a plant in the dark room. You were a young boy, you sang in the Polish woods Limping away away.I in this city, held In a dream of children.Some mythic animal Rises now, flies up, white from the sea-floor. In all our death, the glow behind his eyes Speaks under all knowing:our lives burn.
Sharp report Quick lipstick Symbols on the mirror Globes of light spun In the dark cold night Fireworks at the shore Where power roars in On breakers broken By a pin into the moon Travel reveals more Of life in movies We who are moved by Clouds at midnight Have grasped the illusion Crossing the black room A bright beam lights The thin sheet With a shadow mark Some star poses A presence in scarlet Carnival laughter And then the car Pointed into soft darkness Starts up like a knife
Out of the east window a storm Blooms spasmodically across the moonrise; In the west, in the haze, the planets Pulsate like standing meteors. We listen in the darkness to the service of Tenebrae, Music older than the Resurrection, The voice of the ruinous, disorderly Levant: &ldquo;Why doth the city sit solitary That was full of people?&rdquo; The voices of the Benedictines are massive, impersonal; They neither fear this agony nor are ashamed of it. Think ... six hours ago in Europe, Thousands were singing these words, Putting out the candles psalm by psalm ... Albi like a fort in the cold dark, Aachen, the voices fluttering in the ancient vaulting, The light of the last candle In Munich on the gnarled carving. &ldquo;Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Return ye unto the Lord thy God.&rdquo; Thousands kneeling in the dark, Saying, &ldquo;Have mercy upon me O God.&rdquo; We listen appreciatively, smoking, talking quietly, The voices are coming from three thousand miles. On the white garden wall the shadows Of the date palm thresh wildly; The full moon of the spring is up, And a gale with it.
Now cometh on the dead time of the year: Meadows in flood and heaths all barren are. Across the downs and black, tempestuous leas Blow the dull boomings of deserted seas. No horsemen fare abroad: no shepherds watch. And shivering birds cower within the thatch: But up the wind, around and down the gale Steeple to steeple, bell to bell doth hail: <> Thro' rainy distance, hid from touch and sight Man unto man doth make his kinship known And cries from bell-throats: &lsquo;God doth own his own, Being man!&rsquo; Lo, in the warmths and golden lights Sheltering by hearths, 'neath roofs, thro' these fell nights Home from the barren heaths and hungry seas We voyage bravely towards awakening: Since dead o' the year leads on to distant spring, Sleep towards daybreak, and old memories Unto new deeds to do. So bell to bell Calleth across the folds:  <> <>
Taylor, Don, Jim and John hurrah! it is my lucky year! for even in these dismal states where Nixon and Kennedy are candidates I found me something practical to cheer: Jim! John! Taylor! Don! Now let the envious and grim who slander me, look at these gifted and loyal beauties, Don, Taylor, John and Jim! I long between success and failure hovered, but God with His large hands and broad grin burdens me with garlands, John and Jim, Don and Taylor, hurrah! and if my busy pen has well deserved of America, to my amazement she has given me of the best she has, hurrah! For some can't and some stall but we friends are practical, and when I have been at a loss my four friends have come across. The effort people put into deciding whether or what to do is better used in showing how, and fucking, and cooking chow. But you young men, a storm of gratitude and confusion baffles me. I know you love me just to sustain a while yet your old artist and champion. I stand before you with bowed head. What now must I invent or fight in order not to let you down? teach me, for my classic wit is out of touch with your new spirit.
I believe that a young woman Is standing in a circle of lions On the other side of the sky. In a little while I must carry her the flowers Which only fade here; and she will not cry If my hands are not very full. Fiery antlers toss within the forests of heaven And ocean's plaintive towns Echo the tread of celestial feet. O the beautiful eyes stare down ... What have we done that we are bless&egrave;d? What have we died that we hasten to God? And all the animals are asleep again In their separate caves. Hairy bellies distended with their kill. Culture blubbering in and out Like the breath of a stranded fish. Crucifixion in wax. The test-tube messiahs. Immaculate fornication under the smoking walls Of a dead world. I dig for my death in this thousand-watt dungheap. There isn't even enough clean air To die in. O blood-bearded destroyer! In other times ... (soundless barges float down the rivers of death) In another heart These crimes may not flower ... What have we done that we are bless&egrave;d? What have we damned that we are blinded? Now, with my seven-holed head open On the air whence comes a fabulous mariner To take his place among the spheres  The air which is God And the mariner who is sleep I fold Upon myself like a bird over flames. Then All my nightbound juices sing. Snails Pop out of unexpected places and the long light lances of waterbulls plunge into the green crotch of my native land. Eyes peer out of the seaweed that gently sways Above the towers and salt gates of a lost world. On the other side of the sky A young woman is standing In a circle of lions  The young woman who is dream And the lions which are death.
Lying in bed this morning you read to me of continental drift, how Africa and South America sleeping once side by side slowly slid apart; how California even now pushes off like a swimmer from the country's edge, along the San Andreas Fault. And I thought about you and me who move in sleep each night to the far reaches of the bed, ranges of blanket between us. It is a natural law this drift and though we break it as we break bread over and over again, you remain Africa with your deep shade, your heat. And I, like California, push off from your side my two feet cold against your back, dreaming of Asia Minor.
In the mechanical toy museum At the end of Brighton's Palace Pier Ten new pence will buy five old, For history suffers inflation as well And Jean Boudin might not believe How big the smudged brown coins appear, Designed to fit a pauper's eyes Or the Jolly Nigger's thrifty tongue. But no one is short of a penny in here And that crimson-lipped, liquorice Cast-iron slave is not one of the relics Preserved in this tomb of Amusements. Take care. These are delicate engines. The pin-table predates the tilt, Two threadbare teams stand riveted In goalless extra time and the girls In the peepshow must never be still Or their bones will step out of their skins. It keeps you fingering your change, This taste for proofs of entropy. Best of all, watch the beheading. &lsquo;Madame Guillotine est morte,&rsquo; A visitor carefully tells his son, Who is keen to observe the procedure again. But when the Bastille springs open, Why, every time, does it seem that the corpse Will pluck the straws from his spouting neck, Take up his perruked head and walk With absolute confidence back Down the mad-mirrored ormolu halls Of the  Never existed, still less eaten cake?
The power death hasof touchingThe hard knock that knocks you in not down into a jagged bird nest through which the feathers of the soul squeeze out leaving a bubble of heat and a body on the floor The endless piano practice halted abruptly by the consciousness of another instrument which my father never played because I would recognize it which I will never play because I  The room lit up by Something &amp; seeing lime green mammals with fur standing up on their bellies! The light drizzle off the Ocean &amp; Seeing how Seeing is equivalent of something without description with a deep aura Oh how to be human and pretend not to beThese are basic rights without being forced to eat the world and how these rights finally after eating the world become the rights of someone elseA nameless Someone with a point of light
<>  I have sailed as a butterfly sails whose priming wings unfurled Leave the familiar gardens and visited fields behind  To follow a cloud in the east rose-flushed on the rim of the world. I have strayed from the trodden highway for walking with upturned eyes  On the way of the wind in the treetops, and the drift of the tinted rack. For the will to be losing no wonder of sunny or starlit skies  I have chosen the sod for my pillow and a threadbare coat for my back. Evening of ample horizons, opaline, delicate, pure,  Shadow of clouds on green valleys, trailed over meadows and trees, Cities of ardent adventure where the harvests of Joy mature,  Forests whose murmuring voices are amorous prophecies, World of romance and profusion, still round my journey spread  The glamours, the glints, the enthralments, the nurture of one whose feet From hours unblessed by beauty nor lighted by love have fled  As the shade of the tomb on his pathway and the scent of the winding-sheet. I never could rest from roving nor put from my heart this need  To be seeing how lovably Nature in flower and face hath wrought,  In flower and meadow and mountain and heaven where the white clouds breed  And the cunning of silken meshes where the heart's desire lies caught. Over the azure expanses, on the offshore breezes borne,  I have sailed as a butterfly sails, nor recked where the impulse led, Sufficed with the sunshine and freedom, the warmth and the summer morn,  The infinite glory surrounding, the infinite blue ahead.
Ol' Rex's son couldn't cope with the waste, or so he said after Grace. At footy training he claimed a morbid curiosity and a rough-'n'- ready sense of humour. The truth be had, he couldn't be bothered breaking his back bending over to grab the corpses by the wool-on-their-backs and slinging (with the correct shovelling action) his recently collapsed livelihood onto the back of his truck. Not even the front-end loader which his neighbour the footy coach favoured: trench graves and barrows to remind the forgetful,  stimulate the thin-skinned folk visiting  from the city. No, he favoured the tractor  and disc ploughs set in tandem: the drought recently broken and the ground needing preparation (anyway). No, he just ploughed them in. Instant  blood and bone. Organic fertiliser as underlay for the carpet of spray he applied just in case  modern weeds couldn't (or wouldn't) understand the older methods of control. Furthermore, it should be said, ol' Rex's son realised that there were ironies contained in his actions that he couldn't (or shouldn't) even begin to realise. And if ol' Rex knew of them he kept it quiet, refusing to discuss the incident   at any price.
A profusion of humming- birds and bougainvillea whose abundant blooming is no more the pleasure than the sound of its saying in your mouth how it blooms in lips and tongue and teeth like the name for something learned from a lover or done with a stranger or a gift borne home after distant travel for your beloved who waves from the front porch welcome and wooing smiling down on you like bougainvillea.
The decay of cathedrals is efflorescent through the phenomenal growth of movie houses whose catholicity is progress since destruction and creation are simultaneous without sacrifice of even the smallest detail even to the volcanic organ whose woe is translatable to joy if light becomes darkness and darkness light, as it will  But schism which seems adamant is diverted from the perpendicular by simply rotating the object cleaving away the root of disaster which it seemed to foster. Thus the movies are a moral force Nightly the crowds with the closeness and universality of sand witness the selfspittle which used to be drowned in incense and intoned over by the supple-jointed imagination of inoffensiveness backed by biblical rigidity made into passion plays upon the altar to attract the dynamic mob whose female relative sweeping grass Tolstoi saw injected into the Russian nobility
I am home eating a heart A very slow heart! A languishing pregnancy pushes its lazy baby through the tenth year! We hear the news under- water Morsel after morsel of hysteria. Look I am home with the bride She is lying on a bed of artichokes with her heart hovering over her overripe belly And she hasn't been speaking for years except to me! And I lie! I lie a lot! I will eat this heart I will go out and tell Look I ate a heart I will do it again! I will eat your heart if only you could be seized with such miracles! If only you could rot so graciously on a bed of artichokes If only you could drive me south! Drive me deaf! If you could bubble like mineral waters! If you could walk up my ladders! Human ladders!
There was barely a one among them who thought be needed The three whole hours allowed. After say two, Big papers started to bloom. I went out to collect them. Divested of their petals the candidates each Sank back dead with a sigh and the clock went suddenly Still unsure who was asking what, so it just Went if they weren't looking and not if they were. I, having cruised this test in an earlier life, Saw rhombuses in my name and coloured them in. Until as there always is there was only one, One in the light, on the spot, while the rest of them stared In exasperation escalating to anger, Not that after their answers a slower answer Was worming across a space, but that that answer Was jogging the world and it was too late to right it.
Life! Ay, what is it? E'en a moment spun From cycles of eternity. And yet, What wrestling 'mid the fever and the fret Of tangled purposes and hopes undone! What affluence of love! What vict'ries won In agonies of silence, ere trust met A manifold fulfillment, and the wet, Beseeching eyes saw splendors past the sun! What struggle in the web of circumstance, And yearning in the wing&egrave;d music! All, One restless strife from fetters to be free; Till, gathered to eternity's expanse, Is that brief moment at the Father's call; Life! Ay, at best, 'tis but a mystery!
Love, that in silence writes upon these eyes The script of that sweet music her eyes bear, Whose light was born not, changes not, nor dies, But makes the living dumb, the dead aware, Pronouncing great philosophers unwise, Her truth being breathed upon the impassioned air So secretly that thought, remembering, cries: 'Tell me, my God: was she not always there?' Love, that in silence writes, makes youth and age Divide her light, light that is swift and slow, The living light, and light from the dead page That sees her newly, and says long ago: &lsquo;In her all myths have found their period, Being herself the handiwork of God.&rsquo;
The white rhinoceros was eating phosphorus! I came up and I shouted Oh no! No! No!  you'll be extinct in two years! But he shook his ears and went on snorting, knee-deep in pawpaws, trundling his hunger, shrugged off the tick-birds, rolled up his sleeves, kicked over an anthill, crunched, munched, wonderful windfall, empty dish. And gored that old beat-up tin tray for more, it stuck on his horn, looked up with weird crown on his horn like a bear with a beehive, began to glow  as leerie lair bear glows honeybrown  but he glowed white and bright and the safety-catches started to click in the thickets for more. Run, holy hide take up your armour  Run white horn, tin clown, crown of rain-woods, venerable shiner! Run, run, run! And thunders glowing like a phantom through the bush, beating the guns this time, but will he always when his only camouflage is a world of white? Save the vulnerable shiners. Watch the phosphorus trappers. Smash the poisonous dish.
When I read Shakespeare I am struck with wonder that such trivial people should muse and thunder in such lovely language. Lear, the old buffer, you wonder his daughters didn't treat him rougher, the old chough, the old chuffer! And Hamlet, how boring, how boring to live with, so mean and self-conscious, blowing and snoring his wonderful speeches, full of other folks' whoring! And Macbeth and his Lady, who should have been choring, such suburban ambition, so messily goring old Duncan with daggers! How boring, how small Shakespeare's people are! Yet the language so lovely! like the dyes from gas-tar.
The good Doctor gnashed his way through to Lake Ujijiji, &ldquo;On to the Source,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;Home to Mummy.&rdquo; While a child in Indiana he ate his gradecard on the bus to stardom, a banquet of mean scraps and snide comments. He commenced to roam with his ancient flyswatter and tiny glove  a stranger's pants were torn on the treetops. First by taxi, then night fell over his hairy shoulders: &ldquo;Let's make camp!&rdquo; Vexed, the night did not reply. Next day he's on his way, to the Lake somewhere. And that night he burns a peacock feather. His body carried in a rickshaw to be face to face with the Magenta Queen, and then scrawling  in her yearbook. And by degrees the Doctor arrived refreshed and pulling a dead canary. &ldquo;O feathered Priestess of the downy bush, on to the Source!&rdquo; he cried, unable to halt or fall down; onward to the heart of the circle, living his life as more than a chore well, not really a circle. And if there were depots or outstations, one dry goods store, he'd stop and forget to unravel his tale: <>
Our schemes are so fragile a fire begins mincing childishly through the backstreets, through our fingers and we'll never forget; the whole world is a library of fire and we'll never get out of it, or we're almost out of it  my twilight yearns for yours. I don't want to be there when they drop the bomb,  a tracer-bullet over your sock, whatever for I forgot. My Master avoids me, so I must stop this program for a moment. A moment of prayer. Our trained midgets will be waiting with bats to greet you in the lobby. Then I am your slave, I bite and claw subject to change.
The physical expeditions of an old man Are formidable (all those ants) Through the wind Or up and down stairs And be careful Watch his dreams His dreams will be Sexually ambitious Watch out watch out Young ladies You might be stripped and raped Or beaten, very pleasantly Mon Dieu, can I stand all this I don't intend to dive from the end of the ship Or in front of a motor-car Or off a bridge But watch it Goddess, Queen, calm Moving through the sky with dignity Preserve me Winking like I do
The chessboard was reflected in her eyes. Eager to beat her, first I looked in her eyes. I made a Spanish move, an ancient one, and broken was the red rank of pawns in her light eyes. Then I lowered my eyes from that chessboard and Love said, &ldquo;Oh not her; conquer the king if you can.&rdquo; My eyes I lowered to the checkerboard planted with lords in particolored fiefs. My red soul hated the black chesspieces and first my knights flew forth, to dominate. I hovered over the pattern like a hawk and Art said, &ldquo;Do not win. The pattern is enough.&rdquo; Then the chess-game became luminous and then I was not and then we were again, and suddenly into the center came of that luminous crisscross of mathematical possibilities the Angel Fame whose left wing was love and his right wing was death.
She must have been about twelve in 1942. She stood in front of the tall hall mirror and she made a mou. With her pretty not- yet-kissed mouth she made an ugly mou mou that didn't mean anything she knew. So bony, so skinny and so very naked. Little pink belled breasts like dew. The mirror did what she did  mou mou Nowhere to go. Nothing to do.
What I want in heart <> Said the tree Is that none come touching For their own stuff Any part of Me. And over him a wall Of shifting fog began To build, little on little  Like a wet shroud. No birds Came then. And with them Stars Stayed. His poor branches Trailed white and still. He Wept. His Loudest cry went unheard. So was Crucifixion's tree
O wretched man, the knot of contraries, In whom both heaven and earth doth move and rest, Heaven of my mind, which with Christ's love is blest, Death of my heart, which in dull languor lies. Yet doth my moving will still circulize My heaven about my earth with thoughts' unrest, Where reason as a sun from east to west Darteth his shining beams to melt this ice. And now with fear it southward doth descend, Now between both is equinoctial, And now to joys it higher doth ascend, And yet continues my sea glacial. What shall I do but pray to Christ the Son: In earth as heaven, lord, let thy will be done.
The mind drifts warmly, focused on farther dreams. There comes over the eyes a vast and immeasurable tide, With no shore breaking, the lift of a darkening sea, And the mind goes down to it gently, lapped in the lull. Now from the sunken brain the freed flesh throbs the deep song; The bone and the fiber hark the same music; The blood pounds cleanly, pulsing wantonly through the slack and indolent limbs, Loosed from the mind's hand, the nerve's dominance, Sprung to the secret joy of release. It comes to the eyes as a moving tide, With no shore breaking, the lift of a darkening sea, And the mind goes down to the depth and the silence; The loose blood pounds the deep song.
There was never danger in this black sad water. Not one monster. Not one cruel event along the bank. It was peaceful even when that carnage raged up north. The plague passed by without one victim, and if a barge hauled contraband, the tedious rhythm of its cruise always made the mean cop sleep. The captain of the tug arrived from upstream country angry: they still sing about the girl who threw the lock gate open at the curve. The danger is the world reflected off the black. The peace of maple shade is doubled. Silence is compounded until wrens are roaring and the soft plunk of a frog goes off beside us bang. Fields that never meant a lover harm slant eerie, and the next town promises no language or a stove. We have followed and followed it down, past farm and kiln, the seldom used repair shop, the warm creak of rusted lock gate gears, unattended locks and wild vines thick as the quiet, and here's the end: the town and stores sell candy. The final gate swings open. The black canal turns generous and green and issues gifts, barges, tugs and sailboats to the open world. Never was a danger and they float out, foam out, sail out, loud.
All shadows on the wall are blue. Ladder-shadow. The rope askew on the tenth rung. The Manx kitten leaping the gap to the orchard wall. Yours, searching the February soil for points of green. Papery brown flowers of dead hydrangea stir. From the wall to the tenth rung the kitten drops and settles, fur black and tiger-barred with black, tense at the rope a breath scares. In her face the sudden sticky green of buds in darkness burns with sun. Your shadow turns. I hear it on the stair. The ladder's last. The falling sun gradually drowns it, rung by rung.
Ye sons of Erin who have come To this fair land to make your home, Look back upon your native shore, Where lordling rule makes thousands poor, And tell me why ye stand arrayed With those, who would your rights invade? With those who would extend a course Of human bondage, tenfold worse Than England's Land Monopoly, All o'er this land of Liberty. Know ye not that with the class, Known as the Democratic mass, Stand your uncompromising foes, And source of all our country's woes? Tyrants, whose avaricious lust, Would fain have ground you to the dust, Long ere time's dial marked this hour, Had their best wishes been their power. Remember great O'Connell's name! And sully not his world-wide fame By any glaring act of shame; Remember, how he once returned To Southern planters moneys, earned By the bondman 'neath the yoke, And all those burning words he spoke; And let your great example be His life and marked consistency.
TUPUSELEIA We tack into the lagoon Shipping water I am ready To throw up &ldquo;Having The time of my life!&rdquo; (&ldquo;He feeling good feeling Good!&rdquo; The Filipino giggled As the passenger Staggered through the club car To vomit.) The time of my life In a double canoe With the policeman And another savage On the aerial WC Wrapped in a coxswain's cloak <> Golden houses dip their thatch At high tide <> (Death in Venice) Dark inside Bronze bodies appear At the doors (Do not shoot Til you see the whites of their eyes) &ldquo;From time to time firm breasts stick out&rdquo; (Fear of pointed objects) <> &ldquo;Dip their long thatch beards In the water&rdquo; (Morning) But at night (lowtide) &ldquo;I urinated from a height of 13 feet.&rdquo; Morning again gentle hills Sprawling spidery trees. &ldquo;I evacuated straight into the sea From a privy above the water&rdquo; Then we talked of sun and moon And the causes of things On the way to Port Moresby And McCann's Hotel Sherry and the gramophone Icy beer and &ldquo;... that woman Vulgar beyond endurance.&rdquo;
We are not the first to put time on this room wash in their sink put love into this bed and walk across these creaking floors. Such furniture as this the politicians forgot to axe and in the red light of the fire exit we hear voices drifting over the transom talking of wars that are gone so we can sleep a little
They were doing their thing in the burning fiery furnace, you couldn't hear the flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery and all kinds of music for the silence of the flames. Everything was very quiet in the heart of the furnace. The wine was red, the acrylic was vermilion, the pictures on the walls were hanging by their nails. The needle was a diamond paddling in the bloodstream issuing from the heart of the silence of the furnace, streaming where it paddled in the stream that it was, homing on the centre never to be punctured. All the holy children were dancing on the needle doing nothing but their thing in the burning fiery furnace, Shadrach and Shakeback and Meshach and Sheshach and Abednego and gay to bed we go along and upwards of a hundred holy children in the burning fiery furnace. It was dead still and silent at the centre of the disc. There was the golden image, balls to the golden image, balls to Nebuchadnezzar the king who set it up. Not a note was audible over the silence of the flames, of the psaltery and the dulcimer and all kinds of music. Came the holy cold of morning, with all kinds of music raking out the furnace, when their thing was done, and which child broke silence, squeaking from the ashes, issuing from the music of the flute, harp, etc., Shadrach or Shakeback or Meshach or Sheshach, or gay to bed we go along with Abednego or whom? growing up the stone stair, issuing from the music, sucking on a diamond like an apricot stone, saying <> <> <> <>
I always was afraid of Somes's Pond: Not the little pond, by which the willow stands, Where laughing boys catch alewives in their hands In brown, bright shallows; but the one beyond. There, when the frost makes all the birches burn Yellow as cow-lilies, and the pale sky shines Like a polished shell between black spruce and pines, Some strange thing tracks us, turning where we turn. You'll say I dream it, being the true daughter Of those who in old times endured this dread. Look! Where the lily-stems are showing red A silent paddle moves below the water, A sliding shape has stirred them like a breath; Tall plumes surmount a painted mask of death.
How clear, how lovely bright, How beautiful to sight  Those beams of morning play; How heaven laughs out with glee Where, like a bird set free, Up from the eastern sea  Soars the delightful day. To-day I shall be strong, No more shall yield to wrong,  Shall squander life no more; Days lost, I know not how, I shall retrieve them now; Now I shall keep the vow  I never kept before. Ensanguining the skies How heavily it dies  Into the west away; Past touch and sight and sound, Not further to be found, How hopeless under ground  Falls the remorseful day.
It is not enough To have winning ways,   To follow with an indolent eye The flicker-pattern of the days,   The acquisitive arts Are not enough,   It is a little and a tired time To be making money or love,   A kiss, a cuddle, A crossed cheque,   Walk among statues in the dark, The odds are you will break your neck
This dream the world is having about itself includes a trace on the plains of the Oregon trail, a groove in the grass my father showed us all one day while meadowlarks were trying to tell something better about to happen. I dreamed the trace to the mountains, over the hills, and there a girl who belonged wherever she was. But then my mother called us back to the car: she was afraid; she always blamed the place, the time, anything my father planned. Now both of my parents, the long line through the plain, the meadowlarks, the sky, the world's whole dream remain, and I hear him say while I stand between the two, helpless, both of them part of me: &ldquo;Your job is to find what the world is trying to be.&rdquo;
The marriage of this horizontal land Lying so low, so open and exposed, Flat as an open palm, and never closed To restless storm and the relentless wind, This marriage of low land and towering air  It took my breath away. I am still crazed Here a month later, in my uplands, dazed By so much light, so close to despair. Infinite vertical! Who climbs to Heaven? Who can assault the cloud's shimmering peak? Here the intangible is the mystique, No rock to conquer and no magic mountain, Only the horizontal infinite Stretched there below to polarize The rush of height itself, where this land lies Immense and still, covered by changing light. Those troubling clouds pour through the mind. An earthquake of pure atmosphere Cracks open every elemental fear. The light is passionate, but not defined. So we are racked as by a psychic fault, Stormed and illuminated. &ldquo;Oh sky, sky, Earth, earth, and nothing else,&rdquo; we cry, Knowing once more how absolutes exalt. Slowly the eye comes back again to rest There on a house, canal, cows in a field. The visionary moment has to yield, But the defining eye is newly blest. Come back from that cracked-open psychic place, It is alive to wonders freshly seen: After the earthquake, gentle pastures green, And that great miracle, a human face.
<> Its purple tatters twitched aside, and lo! The fourth King Harry's reign in lusty show Behind, its deeds in living file outrolled Of peace and war; some sage, some mad, and bold: Last, near a tree, a bridled neighing row With latest spoils encumbered, saints do know, By Hal and Hal's boon cronies; on the wold Laughter of prince and commons; there and here Travellers fleeing; drunken thieves that sang; Wild bells; a tavern's echoing jolly shout; Signals along the highway, full of cheer; A gate that closed with not incautious clang, When that sweet rogue, bad Jack! came lumbering out.
Poinsettias grow ten feet high or so you estimate, hand shading face against late sun. Then two boys chase a burro past us toward steep-hung clothes, cheap hillside scarecrow guarding corn we know to be the poorest in the world, the pathetic worst. It's stalk-furled upon the rock-strewn ruckle spilling down in chunks as we climb tugging stalk and limb until we're on the trail again, this time farther up than we've been before. We're higher than the town, lyre of pale hummingbird is here, painted word of Christ's stumbling progress on twelve concrete crosses, each on its shelf hacked out of red rock where we riprap back, are forced to crawl till we've reached the chapel where candles burn to light a maze of photos, ribbons, and a vase of geraniums and others with names you know. We come down slowly to the town, rejoin the lanes of garbage thrown everywhere, one of each kind known, and yet the good lake glitters, good stars shine.
We lingered in the parlor when the light was gone  And last it left the bell-glass where it shone Upon a mantel of white marble, between Bronze candelabra, which so long upheld Circles of crystals and their lights renewed, Light after light, with glitter. And there were sprays Confined in glass, like a retired delight, In memory only lovely, released beyond The condemnation of the accustomed world: Wild flowers that were not flowers but wild shell Imprisoned in shimmers like a losing wave's, Petals of lucent yellow and pink rose, Their branches pranked with conches as with buds. As though some deluged life had been divulged In words that scarcely spoke of love at all? What quaint intention of the thought had found That artifice of flowers to display Spoils of a secret and crustaceous sea And set them there in perfect clarity Concealed, where none could touch, yet all could see? The change of elements was too profound To smile. We could but think what frantic patience Had possessed those fingers to escape from summer Before they came fastidiously on glass As a transparent bound, and closed a space Where the sea slept, could sleep the winds and the tides, And where might sleep an immense misfortune. We could not take our eyes away, nor move, No more than if we'd seen a crime. None could Withhold the dark. We sat and talked Of trivial things until the moving darkness Removed from sight the glass and from surmise The unreal passions of another age.
The bell that tolls my syllables can tell An underwater tale, clang how there fell Suddenly out of a surface shouting world Into dumb calm doomed children, and there curled (Currents' sick fingers whispering at their hair) Round them a coiling clutch, was our despair. Sea's soft sad pressure, like the sprawl of love, Darkly spreadeagled, so they could not move, The wide wet mouth was heavy, they would choke, Till in that cold confusion pity spoke: &lsquo;This is a nightmare and one is asleep. This is a dream, my brave one, do not weep, Often may drown in dreams and not be dead: Such weight is mother leaning on your bed.&rsquo; But having thought of this to cheat my pain, That woe and wonder harrows me again, Fat clouds seem bulked like whales, while through the green Grave tons of twilight, in a submarine Solidity of air like sea I move, Pressure of horror how our hate hurts love. Deeper than grief can plummet, mercy lies, But not so deep as trust in children's eyes, Justice is high in heaven, but more high Blood of the innocent shall smear the sky  Or think that red the flame of seraph wings, See stained-glass heaven, where each darling sings In God's dark luminous world of green and gold As lovely as death's waters, but less cold: Think what you will, but like the crisping leaf In whipped October, crack your thoughts to grief. In the drenched valley, whimpering and cold, The small ghosts flicker, whisper, unconsoled.
They won't go away, the sea perch circling piles, the searun cutthroat hammering home upriver in rain. I try to ignore them, to focus on women, on the news. They swim between the lines. They live in puddles too muddy to see them. And I see them. They live in dry caves. They migrate cloud to cloud across a sky that's always flowing. Bass and catfish, carp, pompano and cod. What if one day they were gone? What if all creatures, animal and man, arrived in some sane ratio? Would air still stream, light still battle down tidepools to spot the twenty-ray star? And would I still feel you cannot die badly though you scream for mercy and pray the sky stopped at your door made a mistake?
  <> <> <>   <>     <> <>      <> <>   <>      <>      <> <> <>   <> <> <>
They have turned, and say that I am dying. That I have thrown my life away. They have left me alone, where there is no one, nothing save who I am. Not a note nor a word. Cold air batters the poor (and their minds turn open like sores). What kindness What wealth can I offer? Except what is, for me, ugliest. What is for me, shadows, shrieking phantoms. Except they have need of life. Flesh at least, should be theirs. The Lord has saved meto do this. The Lord has made me strong. I am as I must have myself. Against all thought, all music, all my soft loves. For all these wan roads I am pushed to follow, are my own conceit. A simple muttering elegance, slipped in my head pressed on my soul, is my heart's worth. And I am frightened that the flame of my sickness will burn off my face. And leave the bones, my stewed black skull, an empty cage of failure.
Let me not, ever, to the marriage in Cana Of Galilee admit the slightest sentiment Of doubt about the astonishing and sustaining manna Of chance and choice to throw a shadow's element Of disbelief in truth Love is not love Nor is the love of love its truth in consciousness If it can be made hesitant by any crow or dove or seeming angel or demon from above or from below Or made more than it is knows itself to be by the authority of any ministry of love. O no it is the choice of chances and the chancing of all choice the wine which was the water may be sickening, unsatisfying or sour A new barbiturate drawn from the fattest flower That prospers green on Lethe's shore. For every hour Denies or once again affirms the vow and the ultimate tower Of aspiration which made Ulysses toil so far away from home And then, for years, strive against every wanton desire, sea and fire, to return across the ever-threatening seas A journey forever far beyond all the vivid eloquence of every poet and all poetry.
Sure I know you! You're a White Man. I'm a Negro. You take all the best jobs And leave us the garbage cans to empty and The halls to clean. You have a good time in a big house at Palm Beach And rent us the back alleys And the dirty slums. You enjoy Rome  And  White Man! White Man! Let Louis Armstrong play it  And you copyright it And make the money. You're the smart guy, White Man! You got everything! But now, I hear your name ain't really White Man. I hear it's something Marx wrote down Fifty years ago  That rich people don't like to read. Is that true, White Man? Is your name in a book Called the  Is your name spelled C-A-P-I-T-A-L-I-S-T? Are you always a White Man? Huh?
Can't teach old dogs fancy new tricks. Can't teach an old dog tricks at all. He just ain't interested in tricks. He'd rather chew on bones or follow real scents down real holes and start to dig. Don't matter to a dog he won't reach China. China ain't what he's after, after all. He's only wanting something cool to do while the sun shines. And digging down on in is cool enough.
Maple &amp; hawthorn &amp; oak. Crow-foot &amp; cinquefoil (Aubrey's Midsummer Silver?). Vine &amp; ivy &amp; hops. Rose, bryony (a Mandrake), geranium, mulberry, wormwood. Fig, bittersweet &amp; blackthorn. It is an assemblage (a community?) including its dragons with crisply carved acorns. Two hounds devour a hare. A bird seizes a grape with its beak. Both green men &amp; the winged fruit of maple are in hierarchy of accuracy the ribbed &amp; the delicate ascending to the general. But here, a throat come aleaf, there a branch held aloft. And a kind of greening speech comes from those mouths all but winged each leaf cleft &amp; articulate. Southwell, of the leaves of limestone: trefoil, quatrefoil, cinquefoil (as  leaf): a &lsquo;burnisht corall&rsquo; &amp; geranium brain: cranesbill, crow-foot: blackthorn &amp; whitethorn, quickthorn, Jack-in-the-green: a man cleft, as Mandrakes, the &lsquo;man-shaped dragon&rsquo;,
&lsquo;Life's difficult. How do you know you're not me? You say you're Peter. Do you want to persist in this claim? You'll have a job to prove it, Unless your documents are in very good order. You were born in Bootle? You couldn't say &lsquo;a fine city&rsquo; At the entrance to Bootle. Anyway, who would want to be a poet? Poets are rarely millionaires. Tennyson had a dubious sense of his own identity, And when he found himself alone, would murmur &lsquo;Far, far away, far, far away&rsquo;. I might deceive you about myself, But I wouldn't deceive you about Tennyson. I feel like a vacuum in an empty space. Vacuums in empty space Are very much at a loose end. Now Blake wasn't at a loose end. You know too much. You claim you're Peter? There are certain sorts of knowledge that are forbidden And there's only one source they can come from, And that's the Devil. Are you the Devil?&rsquo;
Summer with no grass. Reversed from papers in a mushroom's brow one noble, savage wasp roars in the purple tube that shocks it going over our door. This is an English city: if a wasp come to it, argo, it is strawberry jam but if the city go to it, look you, well, it will. The ensuing healthful  as one factory on Narborough Road still zigging insteps at this hour by the lightening horizon, or a little palsy of bones in your rural philosopher's box. In its declining brain-fever and electric (but too short!) perception, swathes a native benediction grass (though smoky!) mown to perfection. Behind the hedges God disposes is a gardener cutting roses and paths all lined with trees define what man encloses. Shiver, little Arcadians! The sun too happily bowls around for a hemisphere whose soul is still compact within its acts. Patience is the virtue of Philosophy; the sun's habitual whirl, the grass-perpetual bed of nails and Hope's spectacular fan are inevitable to faith, a pastoral past. Meanwhile, between lights, the bumpkin's funeral will distract a city from its subterranean fields and all the buried plain.
Sun of all suns, seed of dandelion seeds, Sprung from the stem of delight and the starry course, High at the helm of night, in the van of deeds, A one-wheeled carriage you drive and a headless horse. Your Maker makes you his glory, you grasp and push Through bars the bugle, the mirror, the string of beads, The doll and the wooden men; with a mighty wish You ride the brunt of creation's galloping beds. What golden fleece enshrines at the very prow Your marvelling head, and summons from ancient seas Sailors toiling, under the black sea-crow, What ever-moving, miraculous, wind-faint fleece; But you kick those puppets, those men of deeds, through the bars, The tossed men lost, the lost men under the ark, Seed of spray's seed, swept from the flight of the stars To a point of light in your look that is almost dark. Rameses, trumpet and chariot, all you outrun Grasping your cage where grief is banished for good, Created nothing, timeless, perpetual one Dropped from light-years to crawl under legs of wood, Star-seed, breath-downed, dropped from the topmost sun To the toppling house near the shed that shadows a hearse, From whirling, luminous night, to sleep here alone In the darkness a great light leaves, where a feather stirs. And I, your listener, stopped on the stairway of breath, Awake, in the stranger's bed, in the cold, high room, Calling the sea from Leviathan hollows of earth, I watch them, castaway toys, while you drive and boom Your course in the cot to my bed, with the speed of ice, The giant mirror, the trumpet ringed with a bell, Till naked you stand, gold-fleeced, shaping, a shell, All seas to your colour, Llewelyn, child above price.
When Jane felt well enough for me to leave her a whole day, I drove south by the river to empty my mother's house in Connecticut. I hurried from room to room, cellar to attic, looking into a crammed storeroom, then turning to discover a chest with five full drawers. I labeled for shipping sofas and chairs, bedroom sets, and tables; I wrapped figurines and fancy teacups in paper, preserving things she had cherished and in late years dreaded might go for a nickel at a sale on the lawn. Everywhere I saw shelves and tabletops covered with glass animals and music boxes. In closets, decades of finery hung in dead air. I swept ashtrays and blouses into plastic sacks, and the green-gold dress she wore to Bermuda. At the last moment I discovered and saved a cut-glass tumbler, stained red at the top, <> I piled bags for the dump, then drove four hours north with my hands tight on the steering wheel, drank a beer looking through the day's mail, and pitched into bed with Jane who slept fitfully. When I woke, I rose as if from a drunken sleep after looting a city and burning its temples. All day, while I ate lunch or counted out pills, I noticed the objects of our twenty years: a blue vase, a candelabrum Jane carried on her lap from the Baja, and the small porcelain box from France I found under the tree one Christmas where a couple in relief stretch out asleep, like a catafalque, on the pastel double bed of the box's top, both wearing pretty nightcaps.
It is not what they intend, But we are light-struck, Blinded by their presence, When all they want is to  We have to turn away, Cannot look at the huge, deep Unknown That speaks through their eyes. They strip us down to the infant gaze Still deep in the sky, Still rooted somewhere we cannot remember. Angel, look away. I cannot afford to yield the last defense, To go back  &ldquo;Not back, but deeper,&rdquo; Said the angel, folding his wings.
Oh, who will shoe your pretty little foot, And who will glove your hand, And who will kiss your cherry red lips, When I'm gone to the foreign land? My pappy'll shoe my pretty little foot, And my mammy'll glove my hand, And there's plenty of boys'll kiss my cherry red lips When you're gone to the foreign land. Oh, who will comb your golden hair With the brand new turtle comb, And who will kiss your satin neck, When I'm gone across the foam? Oh, my sis will comb my golden hair, With the dark red turtle comb; And I'll find them'll kiss my neck, Before ever you come home. The doves fly off to the woods from the cote, But at night they all come home; And my heart will turn like that to you, No matter how far I may roam. Oh, the wild birds fly all day in the woods, From tree to tree they roam; My heart's like the birds that have no cote, Wherever they roost is their home. Oh, the crow is the bird with the blackest wing, And it turns to a purple hue; If ever I loose this love that I hold, Let my body waste like the dew. On top of the church is a bird that sits, And he turns with the winds as they blow; My heart's not ready to hold to a man, So why do you plague me so? My heart's as clear as a pane of glass, Your name's carved there in gold; It'll stay right there till the day I die, For all men to behold.
Out of the endless nave  Chorus tremendous, While the gruff organ gave  Sponses stupendous. But of a surety  Not one among them Said the psalms heartfully  Of all that sung them, Saving one chorister,  Sweet as gay bugles when Robin the Forester  Rallied his merry men. Opened his little teeth  Like the round daisy's. Smiled they for things beneath,  Or Zion's praises? He sang of friendly bees  Not of the hills that skip, It was that morning's breeze  Piped on his lip. But his eyes jewelled were  Of his own singing, God saw the sparkle there  On his lids clinging. God the boy's jewel took  Into His casket, Flinging the anthem book  On His waste-basket. God for his glittering world  Seeketh our tears. Prayers show as eyelids pearled.  God hath no ears.
Each day the cardinals call and call in the rain, each cadence scarlet among leafless buckeye, and passionately the redbuds, that can't wait like other blossoms, to flower from fingertip twigs, break forth as Eve from Adam's cage of ribs, straight from amazed treetrunks. Lumps of snow are melting in tulip-cups.
The iron doors we shut on ammo rooms slam like a heart attack. Had the guns remained, grass would still be busted by July to straw and riptides groan as current doubles back in hatred. Concrete walls were hopes of pioneers, one shade deeper gray each spring. From these emplacements, ten-inch cannons tracked fifty years of freighters down the strait. The sea shot out the gunners' eyes with light. The army moved to Coupeville in defeat. What's left to save, the riptide will protect. We joke our way through battlements, dim powder huts, the corridors where words explode and we are skeletons, trapped by a mistake  the wrong door closed, a turn we didn't make. We claw at rungs to take us into sky. Straw bales on the muster ground deny a need for war. The farmer doesn't care. The strait can go unguarded, pagan ships sail in with slave girls and a threat of fun  the Stars-and-Stripes torn down the Constitution used to start a fire for the wienie roast. Only harvest matters. Here, the army harvested no enemy. Even boredom cracked  contraband steamed down in &rsquo;twenty-eight  the bootleg wink rum for rotting men. Best to come here when the picnics peter out. On dark days, gulls are shells (man will not disarm) and we can play our war. I am a captain. Make that cloud salute. The Olympics bomb the strait with shadow. In the meadow where October green begins, cattle eat and children point their space guns at us, crying boom the booming sea can't hear.
Every day his bonfire The shape of a tepee Showed its reluctant smoke. Springs through a mattress those thin coils, The cut grass glowing like tobacco As he fanned it with a sack. Later I'd walk over to where A thrush had smashed a tigerstriped snailshell And the wires of a wreath Lay like a burnt-out catherine-wheel. Brambles covered the graves, A ball of caterpillars pulsed in its silk nebula, And there on the fire would lie The bodies of snakes the verger had hunted Through the cool, vitreous ivy of the hedge, The harmless grass-adders he'd swung like flails Against a piece of marble coping In that vendetta he pursued Daily and determinedly Against the graveyard's secret life. Perhaps he thought it exposed some mystery, Leaving the grass-snakes there With damp-scorched testaments And dead hydrangea heads like dolls&rsquo; wild hair. Agate green and grey Ran the traceries of grass-snake skin, Their scissor-jaws agape. Slowly the bonfire toppled Like an angel into the weeds.
How sad the thatch, Abandoned, a mass of holes! The peasant in each of us Mourns the absence of smoke. In the distance Heavy trucks roar past; In the foreground, An old man and his bullock Take slow stately steps. A sampler of fields, Those leaning pagodas, The haystacks, A water-wheel, And the white feet of the women, Like rabbits.
Beside you in the truck, I almost forget you are a woman, thirty, turning the wheel, slamming the door. You could be a boy, fifteen, slim and eager for exercise in a soiled shirt and jeans. By the time you closed the deal, the animals were gone, but their ghosts raise their heads as we pass. Black and white cows reclaim the pasture; curious billy goats eye two women rattling up the drive. Like an archetypal barn from memory, the barn slumps broad and red in the rain. Now the great hayloft holds your bed and table. In dreams, the farm boys bale and hurl their burdens into the atrium; I feel the heavy hooves of Clydesdales stamping in their stalls; the walls still hold their scent, their hairs, their troughs, their significant sighs. You have restored yourself by restoring this barn  long days under the sun's hot hand, hours at the drafting table  planning for the time you would have what you need: a place to work, a place to live. Like barn swallows high in the rafters your sculptures float and fly, wings beating against weathered wood. In the studio, your welding tools assume the shapes of fantastic creatures, the bronze and brass of your trade. You lace your boots, tie back your hair, prepare for work like a farmer whose animals, like a ring of friends, surround her.
We're strung out on the plain's upthrust, bubbles against the sill of the horizon. Already the dark folds each figure to itself like a mother putting on her child's overcoat, or a paid attendant, who quickly and deftly slots goose-pimpled arms into their stoles. My own mother is attending to her daughters in the Christmas gloom of our long garden before the others are born. A stream's tongue takes its first courses: in siren suits and our cheek-hugging bonnets we put one foot each in that water. Now standstill clumps sink and disappear over the plate-edge of the world. The trees hold up fingers like candelabra, blue and unsure as the word &lsquo;distant&rsquo;. Casually heeled there, we circle the New Look skirts of our mother. The attendant's hands skim on a breast fused into party-going ramparts of taffeta, but he takes up his gaze into the hall as if there's nothing to be sorry or glad for, and nothing in the snowy eternity that feathers his keyhole.
The magic lantern show is nearly over. The bilious frog in his tasselled smoking-cap Croaks and goggles fubsily in his box; Ageing monkeys, faced in gold and scarlet, Twirl themselves off with their barrel-organs. Goodnight to monocles and waxed mustachios, Priggers and prancers of the Victorian order. Light now draws perfect family circles, Grey as smoke-wreaths, dim as muddled homework: My mother, profound and sleepy as a doll, Grandad, young and bowlered, slipping himself a grin, Granny laughing, a dog wild shreds of hair, Long nose, black eyes come from the dust To see nothing that once saw something. Now for the tailpiece: Grandad's fingers Twitch past a small black train, mad as a spider, Tiptoe across a bridge across a ravine Across green tumbling across to a blue river. The train pulls gruffly out of Lincoln Central; My eyes choke on coal dust, search the wind And clanking signals for some huge delight Cloudy as last year's pain, bright as a dewdrop. There is a handle, polished as a nut, The key to the last slide lifted from the box. Turn it, the arcs and lozenges dissolve, Spinning the good dreams and the humpbacked night To overlapping folds of pink and violet, The Rose window high in Lincoln's transept. Granny, the frog, the little tiptoe train Open and shut, the dog's blind, lustrous eyes Bright as the eyes of spiderwebs and flowers, As the next lucky thing hoped or counted for. The magic lantern is hot silver tin And if you touch it, it will burn your fingers.
Sometimes in the park a woman rests on a bench, her legs spread wide as a sleeping child's. You can see underneath her skirt she is naked and worn-out. Telling myself that place is really a flower is my method of making her go away. She can sleep on the bench until snow covers her. I can lie in bed with the white blanket up to my neck, pretending I'm cold. In the hospital, one man's cancer was different: it grew straight up from his bones and burst through his skin. It was easy to call it  <> His wife was pale and small, her grief simple to imagine. Her bones were so thin but she wanted to give them to him. They were harmless. There is nothing beautiful about the fly crawling on the starving child's face. The image enters. Locked deep inside, it cannot be transformed. But there is another picture: everyone joining hands for a moment though it's impossible to hold on. Even the smallest movement  someone's hand chasing a fly  is enough to break the chain.
&lsquo;They dug ten streets from that there hole,&rsquo; he said, &lsquo;Hard on five hundred houses,&rsquo; He nodded Down the set of the quarry and spat in the water Making a moorhen cock her head As if a fish had leaped. &lsquo;Half the new town &lsquo;Came out of yonder King Street, Queen Street, all &lsquo;The houses round the Green as far as the slagbank, &lsquo;And Market Street, too, from the Crown allotments &lsquo;Up to the Station Yard.&rsquo; &lsquo;But Market Street's &lsquo;Brown freestone,&rsquo; I said. 'Nobbut the facings; &lsquo;We called them the Khaki Houses in the Boer War, &lsquo;But they're Cumberland slate at the back.&rsquo; I thought of those streets still bearing their royal names Like the coat-of-arms on a child's Jubilee Mug  Nonconformist gables sanded with sun Or branded with burning creeper; a smoke of lilac Between the blue roofs of closet and coal-house: So much that woman's blood gave sense and shape to Hacked from this dynamited combe. The rocks cracked to the pond, and hawthrons fell In waterfalls of blossom. Shed petals Patterned the scum like studs on the sole of a boot, And stiff-legged sparrows skid down screes of gravel. I saw the town's black generations Packed in their caves of rock, as mussel or limpet Washed by the tidal sky; then swept, shovelled Back in the quarry again, a landslip of lintels Blocking the gape of the tarn. The quick turf pushed a green tarpaulin over All that was mortal in five thousand lives. Nor did it seem a paradox to one Who held quarry and query, turf and town, In the small lock of a recording brain.
<> The hills speak with their mouths; The sky laughs out of the rims of their eyes. The earth walks with the feet of the people; And the wind and the dead are their souls awake; And the sleep that is theirs comes when the eyelid Slips down to meet the soiled slant of their cheeks. Great are the mountain slopes curving along the line Flanked by the river or the smooth glint of the track of the train: A speed of smoke, a sprung coil loosely heaped. Look to the right, look to the left and the fields That fit in languid patterns between the trees, Umber cornstalks, hay in warmth-spilt stacks. Tight is the hair of women who call cows to the milking: Wrists and fingers play out the movement of the udder-press. White is the angle and the hiss and splash of milk. The oxen plow and wagon the hay in its high dung-gold, Making long horns shape and hold the moon, The red of their sides squat. The trees spring in wide green waves to the wind, To the fields and the well-palmed spread of space. The men are before the night, The cracks of their cheeks filled with dust, And the hands heavy like listless rakes hung down, And the dirt and sweat on their lips, And the lift and fall of their chests. Steps of men and women go from the field to the home, From the plow to the reaping in the deep high swell of wheat. These are the simple people, Whose hands rest still on a Sabbath. And great are the fields and the mountains, And great are the slopes and the valleys.
Our heliteam had mid-air blowout dropping flares 5 burned alive. The children carry hand grenades to and from piss tubes. Staring at tracer bullets rice is the focal point of war. On amphibious raid, our heliteam found dead vc with maps of our compound. On morning sick call you unzip; before you piss you get a smear. &ldquo;VC reamed that  even at movies: &ldquo;no round-eye pussy no more&rdquo;  Tympanic membrane damage: high gone  20&ndash;40 db loss mid-frequencies. Scrub-typhus, malaria, dengue fever, cholera; rotting buffalo, maggoted dog, decapped children. Bangkok: amber dust, watches, C-rations, elephanthide billfolds, cameras, smack. Sand&amp;tinroof bunkers, 81/120 mm: &ldquo;Health record terminated this date by reason of death.&rdquo; Vacuolated amoeba, bacillary dysentery, hookworm; thorazine, tetracycline, darvon for diarrhea. <> Brown's mixture, ETH with codeine, cortisone skin-creams. Written on helipad fantail 600 bed  &ldquo;no purple heart, hit by 'nother marine.&rdquo; &ldquo;Vascular repair, dissection, debridement&rdquo;: sharp bone edges, mushy muscle, shrapnel: stainless bucket. Bodies in polyethylene bag: transport: &lsquo;Tan San Nhat Mortuary&rsquo; Blood, endotracheal tube, prep abdomen, mid-chest to scrotum  &ldquo;While you're fixin' me doc, can you fix them ingrown hairs on my face?&rdquo; &ldquo;They didn't get my balls, did they?&rdquo; 50 mg thorazine &ldquo;Yes they did, marine!&rdquo;
Women and masks: an old familiar story. Life slowly drains away and we are left As masks of what we were. The living past Rightly respects all countenances offered As visible sacrifices to the gods And clamps them fast even upon live faces. Let face be mask then, or let mask be face  Mankind can take its ease, may assume godhead. Thus God from time to time descends in power Graciously, not to a theologian's hell But to our human hell enlaced with heaven. Let us wear masks once worn in the swift circlings And constant clamour of a holy dance Performed always in prayer, in the ecstasy Of love-hate murder today's children always Feeling, recording, never understanding. Yet this old woman understands, it seems, At least the unimportance of half-knowledge, Her face already become mask, her teeth Wide-gapped as though to scare us, her calm face Patterned with wrinkles in unchanging grooves That outlive years, decades and centuries. Hers is a mask remains exemplary For countless generations. Who may wear it? She only, having fashioned it herself. So long as memory lasts us, it was hers. Behind it she assembles her rapt goodness, Her gentle worth already overflooding The mask, her prison, shaming its fierce, holy Terror: for through its gaping sockets always Peer out a pair of young and lovely eyes.
<>  The pleasure, the passion, the prayer; O, when shall my love for thee tire?  Beloved, thou art fearfully fair And I am the soul of desire! I am the soul of desire,  I call with the tones of the sea,  With the infinite yearn of the sea. I am thrilled with my love as a lyre Is thrilled with the songs that transpire For love, and I thirst as a fire   For thee!  For thy indolent hands and thy hair   O beloved! thou art fearfully fair And I am the soul of desire! I am the soul of desire,  O where shall I find thee? My love shall consume thee entire,  My passion shall bind thee!   For a day and a night and a morrow,    Thy body and soul shall be mine   Till the laughter of love and the sorrow    Are shed thro' thy senses like wine.  Where thy bosom is bare My love shall suspire;  Thou art fair, O beloved, thou art fearfully fair! And I am the soul of desire!
  There is Hallelujah Hannah    Walking backwards down the lane,   And I hear the loud Hosanna    Of regenerated Jane;   And Lieutenant Isabella    In the centre of them comes,   Dealing blows with her umbrella    On the trumpets and the drums. &lsquo;Hallelujah!&rsquo; was the only observation That escaped Lieutenant-Colonel Mary Jane, When she tumbled off the platform in the station, And was cut in little pieces by the train.  Mary Jane, the train is through yer:  Hallelujah, Hallelujah! We will gather up the fragments that remain.
On all, the wicked and the innocent, blows the beautiful west wind and the warm sun sheds his light. But from them get much joy and benefit only those at ease in the Lord to whom all good turns to good and hungrily we convalescents who face into the gentle elements. Crazy for crazy, I believe that You make the dead alive and from the evil things that seem I shall awake as from a dream  none hinders me, though I am in prison among men, to say the senseless sentence that saying makes me glad. Often have I dreaming frightened into puzzlement awakened, and most days have proved to be milder than my anxiety  on this analogy I'll say recklessly what pleases me, one day I shall awake to my surprise and sweet confidence in paradise. Since daily without hope I go daily forth my task to do  though wistful and yet somehow despite despair I do go, this is the fact in which I write without belief the consoling thought that when I stand out of the way I shall stand in the sun happy.
Amber and emerald, cairngorm and chrysoprase, Stream through the autumn woods, scatter the beech-wood ways: Ways where the wahoo-bush brightens with scarlet; And where the aster-stalk lifts its last starlet. Ways where the brier burns; poplars drop, one by one, Leaves that seem beaten gold, each like a splash of sun: Round which the beeches rise, tree upon golden tree, That, with each wind that blows, sound like a summer sea. Ways where the papaw leans, great-leaved and beryl-green, Like some grand forester one in Romance hath seen; And like some Indian queen, sung of in story, Flaming the gum-tree stands, crowned with its glory. Ways where the bittersweet, cleaving its pods of gold, Brightens the brake with flame, torches the dingle old: And where the dogwood, too, crimsons with ruby seeds; Spicewood and buckbush bend ruddy with rosy beads. These are the woods of gold; forests our childhood knew, Where the Enchanted dwelt, she with the eyes of blue; She of the raven locks, and of the lovely looks, She who oft gazed at us out of the Story Books. And with that Prince again, striding his snow-white steed, To her deliverance through the gold wood we speed; On through the wood of flame to the Dark Tower, Where like a light she gleams high in her bower.
the wood of the headboard the wood of the closet lean what the place is I've been in daily my life distancesnames positions worlds the sky goes dark light comes effort motionless wind blows caves trees strings the sea full parts dimensions ride
There is something almost but not quite beguiling about the thought of houseboat days. Creaking, lapping, a sense of sway and the illusion of moving might be the romance of a weekend. Toy cabins, timeless horizontal afternoons might at last get through Proust, while she reverses roles at a punchbag on the deck, knocks herself groggy, takes to cushions as the sun goes down. These scenes would only be for laughter though. Who is to make the omelette, the one with throbbing shoulder or the one dozy-eyed from Combray on his back with a paper-knife, reading against the light? The strenuous things are great gods, bored by windows giving on water, and even pretty hands trailed in water knit nothing, and ask nothing to be done. Life came from seas, lakes? It must be a joke. The sluggish firth, like the latest bandage, melts into the body of the earth, cannot even sustain conversation. It would be a breach to crow over a slammed chessman, let alone slot in the Flying Dutchman cassette they'd be sure to pack, these chained wanderers. They dream, in fits and starts; it is only then that the boat drifts, right down to the sea and the keen wind, only then that great gods clap their wings, and he designs an airport, she a house and a dress she stands in at the door to welcome many guests and set parties ablaze.
Through pools of feldspar heav'n, above which lies One cloud's flamingo wing, the Inca, Day, Wades downward to his death; along his way Run little ripples of the sunset skies; And every stepping-stone of mist he tries With Midas foot, transforms its stony gray To burning gold; until, with one red ray, He sinks, and o'er him, stars, like bubbles, rise. So should all beauty pass; in rich accord With its surroundings; touching earth till all Conform to it as an accessory; Transferring to its features the regard Of its own dreams, through which the spiritual At last attains its immortality.
Do these gnarled and twisted trees feel greenness surge at their roots the way saplings do? When a new leaf breaks through are they astonished, as Sarah must have been, at such an improbable birth? The woodpecker, with its firing squad rat-tat-tat, knows each vulnerable spot on the wrinkled bark. In a month these trees will resurrect a shade to sit beneath. There are stumps to rest on everywhere.
&ldquo;so you're hunting for ann well i'm looking for will&rdquo; &ldquo;did you look for him down by the old swimminghole&rdquo; &ldquo;i'd be worse than a fool to have never looked there&rdquo; &ldquo;and you couldn't well miss willy's carroty hair&rdquo; &ldquo;it seems like i just heard your annabel screech have you hunted her round by the rasberrypatch&rdquo; &ldquo;i have hunted her low i have hunted her high and that pretty pink pinafore'd knock out your eye&rdquo; &ldquo;well maybe she's up to some tricks with my bill as long as there's haymows you never can tell&rdquo; &ldquo;as long as there's ladies my annie is one nor she wouldn't be seen with the likes of your son&rdquo; &ldquo;and who but your daughter i'm asking yes who but that sly little bitch could have showed billy how&rdquo; &ldquo;your bastard boy must have learned what he knows from his slut of a mother i rather suppose&rdquo; &ldquo;will's dad never gave me one cent in his life but he fell for a whore when he married his wife and here is a riddle for you red says it aint his daughter her father lays&rdquo; &ldquo;black hell upon you and all filthy men come annabel darling come annie come ann&rdquo; &ldquo;she's coming right now in the rasberrypatch and &ldquo;twas me that she asked would it hurt too much and 'twas me that looked up at my willy and you in the newmown hay and he telling you no&rdquo; &ldquo;then look you down through the old swimminghole there'll be slime in his eyes and a stone on his soul&rdquo;
In troublous night the wind took out the fig With a flying tackle, with a rapist's leap, And laid it on the ground, wrecked at the base, Thick and silvery, unconscious and prostrate With all its fat green foliage, fat white figs. By morning the fat fruit begins to drop Like surrealist raindrops, by ten o'clock The leaves begin to scrunch and die A very sudden and immediate death. I walk around it like an auto wreck Muttering goddammit and get the pruning saw Curved like a scimitar to waste the tree. Flies are already gathering on the fruit, Mashed honey-bellies, honey-leaking glands. I saw as if in a tremendous hurry, Becoming frenzied, using a larger saw, Rose-clippers for twigs, wearing me out. Now there's a yellow bee, now two or three Burrowing into the pulp, signaling me To hold it or give them a chance, or else (Somebody is going to have some white-fig honey). And finally I stack the sticky wood Leaving three feet of trunk and four branch stumps, A mutilate, a monster upsidedown, Four-legged cripple without head To paint with luminous paint for Halloween Beside the front-door pumpkin, trick or treat.
<> The road is forlorn all day, Where a myriad snowy quartz stones lift, And the hoof-prints vanish away. The roadside flowers, too wet for the bee, Expend their bloom in vain. Come over the hills and far with me, And be my love in the rain. The birds have less to say for themselves In the wood-world's torn despair Than now these numberless years the elves, Although they are no less there: All song of the woods is crushed like some Wild, easily shattered rose. Come, be my love in the wet woods, come, Where the boughs rain when it blows. There is the gale to urge behind And bruit our singing down, And the shallow waters aflutter with wind From which to gather your gown. What matter if we go clear to the west, And come not through dry-shod? For wilding brooch shall wet your breast The rain-fresh goldenrod. Oh, never this whelming east wind swells But it seems like the sea's return To the ancient lands where it left the shells Before the age of the fern; And it seems like the time when after doubt Our love came back amain. Oh, come forth into the storm and rout And be my love in the rain.
In Arctic latitudes, almost another planet, Laplanders herd their radiation- laden reindeer down from their mountain feeding grounds. Without a sound now they glide like robes of royalty, billowing, breathing sleeves of vapor, tiara antlers, thick fur glowing dark as mahogany fattened on vegetation watered by nuclear rains. To be slaughtered, and not eaten. So we go into what has been gliding forward to meet us from so long ago we have seen coming against the black velvet of galactic space, the many pouring down to the one wave not yet broken. Shadow on ice, here and gone.
The cowdung-colored mud baked and raised up in random walls, bears the silken lips and lashes of erotic flowers towards a sky of noble clouds. Accepted sacramental excrement supports the ecstatic half-sleep of butterflies, the slow opening and closing of brilliant dusty wings. Bite down on the bitter stem of your nectared rose, you know the dreamy stench of death and fling magenta shawls delicately about your brown shoulders laughing.
Poor baby, hold on; poor, sleepy baby, passed into my arms. We are passing into hell; hold on. We renounce the forces of evil and you cry out. Poor, sleepy baby wanting nothing more than the food your mother has become for you, wanting to go into this night at her breast. Brilliance catches your eye, the candle in your mother's hand, her hair a halo, your fingers transparent. Poor baby, our words wash over you and you brush them away. You want the candle now, and you want your mother. It is not yet time to follow her into the dark. Poor little baby: water on your hair, chrism on your forehead, dried milk on your chin. Poor brave little baby; hold on.
<> How long, O Lord! how long, O Lord! how long Wilt Thou endure this crime? and there, above it, Look down on Earth nor sweep away the wrong! Are these Thy teachings? Where is then that pity, Which bade the weary, suffering come to Thee?  War takes its toll of life in field and City, And Thou must see! O Christianity! And then the children! Oh, Thou art another! Not God! but Fiend, whom God has given release!  Will prayer avail naught? tears of father, mother? To give at last the weary world surcease From butchery? that back again hath brought her Into that age barbarian that priced Hate above Love; and, shod with steel and slaughter, Stamped on the Cross and on the face of Christ.
With an effort Grant swung the great block, The swivel operated and five or six men Crouched under the lee of the straight rock. They waited in silence or counting ten, They thrust their fingers in their wet hair, The steel sweated in their hands. And then The clouds hurried across a sky quite bare, The sounds of the station, three miles off, ceased, The dusty birds hopped keeping watch. And there Arose to what seemed as high as the sky at least, Arose a giant and began to die, Arose such a shape as the night in the East. The stones sobbed, the trees gave a cry, A tremulous wonder shook animal and plant, And a decapitating anger stirred the sky And alone, on a tall stone, stood Grant.
Me have they life to rust, from my occasion bar me! though never was so genial a need for me as now, to shape and call tomorrow in young spirits, as by reason and love I can uniquely, and we blazon the ordinary with baronial glory, each has his rose! Yet here I stall useless and bored, forgotten, out of season. Then a thirst for grandeur makes me phantasize giants! Orion extent in the skies, him who blind (like Milton) through the wild pursued the clang of hammers to the forge, later through sightless eyes astonished large drank sunbeams that renewed his vision mild.
Towards what landlocked summer sidling like swans Will our love move us in those feathered bridals The innocent, the beautiful and the good so briefly Know before their unfolding leaf is fallen? The ring of roses is wrung. Rainspoiled an hour Erases the bunch of pouting and kissing images; Shouting the crossed lives wrestle in the sky And westward a memory carries all love away. Never return again, never return again, Desire for what is gone. And in the wild Winds of the memory, then, great thistles toss Their hair and lash the recollection Till the granite that groans inside us weeps. Where Lost now on rainswept yesterday loiter The once bright bathers in my blue eye? O mackintoshed figures shouldering through clouds Along a skyline of remembrance, forget The hour I housed you in my sheet and shackle Forget, forget the knot and the cup of kindness  For the knot will stick like a rock in the loving Cup of the heart, and break it. Let the clock Wipe clear the face turned back toward such times And circumvent regret. Climb the morning hill Into cold rain, drop the iron chain of flowers, Leave in the valley those hours that live a fable Voicing for ever a vocable that cannot die.
Much of what is seen is best avoided. I squint sometimes, sometimes I go slant. In the nature of things, inevitably, the tackle looms, second zero to left and right in the black and white skull sessions. These are human dreams, our frail approximations of reality, becoming facts we know, or will know. When I collide with them I begin to think how the sportscasters will write it up, a day of carnage, the red claw of fate, defeat in the fourth stanza, a joke whose ending is &ldquo;You had to be there.&rdquo; I've seen lips squeezed grape-like, my own teeth litter the turf, a string of pearls like years cast at the feet of pale cheerleaders. My history is that blurred chalk I see badly after each performance. The caged face remains, sighted over the rear of the pigskin where I squint. Squint or not, that's what's ahead. Coaches with theories from Ivy League to Midwest Renaissance will swear the heart's given, it's all in the feet.... like John Keats, say, cutting at the ode. Some are blunter.  <> <> lips and teeth mean the same to them, who see the field sideways and scream in a jargon remotely perfect as code. I'm paid to crack a rock that growls. Knuckles on what used to be soothing dirt, I stare into a line of butts and see, beyond, that face. It talks and hurts; therefore, I try to run artfully behind the abstract backs of blockers, oblique, numbered, at zero's middle. I don't have to look for what will be there, dark, calling incomprehensibly.
On a hill above Canterbury, the historic Cathedral below us, I pass a monk barefoot and robed, his hands behind him, a meditative stroll. Nevertheless, I strike up a chat, for it is cold and I want to know how he can do it  those bare feet, that thin robe against the wind. This is what at home in the Midwest we call bone-cold, chill enough to freeze the tits off a nun. You get used to it, he grinned through his beard, and I wondered having passed him by, if I too could have learned to walk stones and heath barefoot, take my chance with the wind, go stark naked and not even goose-bumped if I had overcome Lust and Greed and my infinite vulgarity of mind, my insistence on speaking to strangers, all of whom are more holy than I. I passed him by and envied all he had which was nothing but bare feet, a beard, a thin robe against the wind, a smile for those who pass him by, who go off to some other land to walk through fire and not be burned, to stroll through ice and not be chilled.
I want to do a complaint now. Which is to say simply that a hypertrophied prostate, whatever women and other such novices may choose to believe, is quite precisely not my idea of a  Paul or a Sunday outing with the laureate or a grandiluminarious sunset display over the park, etc. Also it is somewhat not like strawberry shortcake. On the contrary it is that insidious, invidious last drip which always waits, the inner adversary, till I'm upzipped, helpless, and heading out, to slip down my thigh like a seed of dying ice, leaving a streak on my pants, which is not nice.
<> <> fit emblems for a city like Calcutta or Madurai crammed to the top of its gates <> <>    yes they have a long-legged dignity that's slightly vulgar <> <>   like Madras lawyers  <>   like grandmother's maggoty curds <> <> <>     like father into the rain, his baggy umbrellas with three ribs broken by his sons in a fencing match and three by last year's winds <>    this furry spider-legged auntie of a bird    <>     filling the sky's transparency with slow sleepy perfect circles like father's Magic Carpet story that rowdy day when the rainstorm leaked through the roof and mother was ill and he had to mop the kitchen of our pattering feet
My tunnel wasn't yet complete. I shook from heavy earrings New dust each day around my feet In muddy forest clearings. The aperture was well concealed, My tools were safe and polished When a news bulletin revealed Walls were to be demolished. I have shed large amounts of sweat, I've crawled and cried and shivered And now I hear we're going to get Deliverance delivered. I am not over-keen to bleed, I didn't take to scraping But it is one thing being freed, Another thing escaping. Digging has helped me through the day, Digging has made me stronger. I can't, with nothing in the way, Make my short tunnel longer. I will sit centre stage, front row And clap as each brick tumbles But where will my half-tunnel go If the whole building crumbles? I'll wait for Liberation Day. The roof will lift, the sun'll shine and with new, free speech I'll say <>
<> Alone dost dwell, perpetually? The latch against thy door is mute, I have not heard thy kind salute, And though I live here at the gate, Have never known thy birth or state, Nor seen thy wide colonial lands With slaves obeying all commands, Or children playing at thy knee; Ah, neighbor mine, unneighborly! The sun beats hard upon thy roof, The tree's cool shadow waves aloof; Thou dost not heed, nor speak in ire, Nor wound thy calm with vain desire. The cones that patter as they fall, The drifts that build thine outer wall, The rains that glisten in the trace Of thine inscription, dimmed apace, The winds that blow, the birds that sing,  Thou carest not for any thing! Two centuries and more art thou In solitude abiding; now This town is other than thy town; Its lanes are highways broad and brown; The oaken houses of thy day, And inns, and booths, are swept away. Strange spires would meet thine eager eye, New ships sail in, new banners fly; And names are kept of them that fell In wars to thee incredible. How beautiful thine endless rest! The quiet conscience in thy breast, Thy hidden place of peace, where pass The ghost-like stirrings of the grass; The long immunity from strife, The tumult, love; the trouble, life; The blossom at thy feet, to be A thousand summers, dust like thee; The winding-sheet, that white as worth, Shuts all thy failings in the earth. My silent neighbor! thou and I Keep unobtrusive company. For us each wild October weaves The glistening clouds, the glowing leaves, And March by March the robin sings, Against the solemn porch of King's, His sweet good-morrow to us both. O be not harsh with me, nor wroth, That I, apart from all the throng, Break, too, thy silence with a song!
I think the detectable difference between winter and summer is a damsel who requires saving, a heroine half- asleep and measurably able to hear but hard to see, like the spaces between the birds when I turn back to the sky for another empty feeling. I would bestow on her a name with a hundred meanings, all of them secret, going their own way, as surely as the silvery mosaic of the previous week, building itself a sort of hotel in her voice, to be used whenever the tale was ruthlessly retold. And let her learn from the sky, which was clever and quiet, the rain for its suddenness, that yes on its own can be a sign for silence, even from that all-too-inviting mouth.
It is the movement that disturbs the line, Thickening the form, Turning into warm Compression what had once been cold and fine. Seen from down here, if only we remained, These hills are high: Driving on, the sky Imposes and no longer can be trained By any structure of the seeming ground. Landscape, I discover, As the car gains over Something that changes from a little mound To monstrous eminence before your eyes, Landscape can flaunt, can Foil like a courtisan: And when you see the difference in size Of cliffs we once considered at the bright Grass along their peak And then saw from the bleak Extremity of sand below, the sight Gives more than pause alas, it gives the slow Ruin of our hopes Fed upon the slopes From where we've been to where we want to go.
Passing along the wharves purposive and sure-footed silent, on soft shoes (better invisible too) a seeking or avenging ghost, a restless unfinished spirit of the Noh maniacally still seeking on faces alive in this world ideal shapes of heaven, vengefully to wrest a stolen inheritance back. To in that instant shed these rags of nakedness! tags of pedestrian speech! and put the great robe on put a silver robe on Dancer of this Island and the Rivers bordering! Question me, I am he; please to undo the spell.
Daisies are broken petals are news of the day stems lift to the grass tops they catch on shoes part in the middle leave root and leaves secure. Black branches carry square leaves to the wood's top. They hold firm break with a roar show the white! Your moods are slow the shedding of leaves and sure the return in May! We walked in your father's grove and saw the great oaks lying with roots ripped from the ground.
Think how we touch each other when we sight land after two years at sea. How we say, &ldquo;It's still there.&rdquo; The gulls weren't lying who came to pilot us home. No matter what happens inside them, the houses climb lovingly tight to hills, and the smoke rising above the houses takes the sea chill out of our bones. When we make out women, the form of them certain against the white seawall, we stand on the rail and wave. What holds us back? The shore boats are waiting. We sit glum in our quarters and sweat. The mate yells, &ldquo;going ashore&rdquo; and the pink girls in the corner with wild lemon hair cry &ldquo;farewell,&rdquo; our bite marks still clear on their necks. How they fought for our kisses south of Australia. What dishes they cooked. Can we ever leave them? Those bright days they flew ahead of the bow singing &ldquo;on,&rdquo; every red inch of their bodies stung by the shark spray, their faces shining alive with our love under the pulsing sky. Our first kiss on land is cold. We turn away. This bay never gets wild. The harbor is ideal. We need not anchor our boat. Three months of summer the water lies flatter than dawn. In this calm weather we have no reason to mock the captain or sneak back of the bilge pump to study worn photos of girls. Long ago, didn't we read how all journeys end? The man in that story, his name lost now, came home tired from the raw world of dragon and flame and developed a coin, still in use, a salmon on one side under the words &ldquo;Good As Water.&rdquo; On the other a woman firm in silver relief.
I eat on all fours over the dank hole where my 200-year- old oak once was now in a pile at the cord-wound corral. I think of the smell of this earth, earth that poisons this brimmed cemetery, burial ground long since forgotten. On a farm in the eastern half of this state, an old woman sat on her porch whistling an Indian tune though whittling in Norwegian. I listen to her son sing of the death of his brother in war, his brothers dying in the old ancestral earth of the Far East or in African mines plaqued in its gold to our commercial hearth. I chop at the tree to make kindling as the fire arches out of sight, food in this old place, this hole in the cosmic earth. Pale in his death heat, the son of the mother on the porch, having heard of her death, reading of his brother's death, reading of the death of his brothers: Indian, Norwegian, sits on this old stump and whittles, whistling: congress of the last poetic word, this damp ceremonial hill, this oak.
might have been. Certainly these ashes might have been pleasures. Pilgrims on their way to the Holy Places remark this place. Isn't it plain to all that these mounds were palaces? This was once a city among men, a gathering together of spirit. It was measured by the Lord and found wanting. It was measured by the Lord and found wanting, destroyd by the angels that inhabit longing. Surely this is Great Sodom where such cries as if men were birds flying up from the swamp ring in our ears, where such fears that were once desires walk, almost spectacular, stalking the desolate circles, red eyed. This place rumord to have been a City surely was, separated from us by the hand of the Lord. The devout have laid out gardens in the desert, drawn water from springs where the light was blighted. How tenderly they must attend these friendships or all is lost. All  Only the faithful hold this place green. Only the faithful hold this place green where the crown of fiery thorns descends. Men that once lusted grow listless. A spirit wrappd in a cloud, ashes more than ashes, fire more than fire, ascends. Only these new friends gather joyous here, where the world like Great Sodom lies under fear. <> <> This the friends teach where such cries as if men were birds fly up from the crowds gatherd and howling in the hear of the sun. In the Lord Whom the friends have named at last Love the images and loves of the friends never die. This place rumord to have been Sodom is blessd in the Lord's eyes.
O! death, If thou has aught of tenderness Be kindly in thy touch Of her whose fragile slenderness Was overburdened much With life. And let her seem to go to sleep, As often does a tired child, when it has grown Too tired to longer weep. A rose but half in bloom  She is too young and beautiful to die, But yet if she must go, Let her go out as goes a sigh From tired life and woe. And let her keep in death's brief space This side the grave, the dusky beauty still Belonging to her face. She must have been Of those upon the trembling lyre Of whom the poets sung; &ldquo;Whom the gods love&rdquo; and desire Fade and &ldquo;die young.&rdquo; Her life so loved on earth was brief, But yet withal so beautiful there is no cause, But in our loss, for grief.
To visit takes an escort: Lolly, red hair fluff all gorgeous down her back. Her peaked little face looks like a Rackham sprite. She's fourteen and keeps a pit bull: Name's Mike. &ldquo;He kept coughin' like to choke. The vet pulled a bone out of his throat.&rdquo; &ldquo;Chicken bone?&rdquo; I'm eyeing the dog. &ldquo;Man's thumb,&rdquo; she says. &ldquo;White man.&rdquo; She plants a fat smooch between the pit bull's eyes and the damn dog grins. &ldquo;Musta come in the yard last night while we was in town. You didn't hear nothin'?&rdquo; &ldquo;I wasn't home. You kiss that dog?&rdquo; Down by the creek the dog rolls in violets run wild over the floodplain, and lies at Lolly's feet. &ldquo;When my dad hits me, Mike gets mad. He's a good dog.&rdquo; When the sun drops to gold evening angle, that hair of hers looks lit from inside to where I wish I could paint. &ldquo;When my dad gets drunk first thing he does is chain him up.&rdquo; She has finespun hands. She flicks back her hair and twists it around and around her index finger, tight as teeth.
You are a rose, but set with sharpest spine; You are a pretty bird that pecks at me; You are a little squirrel on a tree, Pelting me with the prickly fruit of the pine; A diamond, torn from a crystal mine, Not like that milky treasure of the sea A smooth, translucent pearl, but skilfully Carven to cut, and faceted to shine. If you are flame, it dances and burns blue; If you are light, it pierces like a star Intenser than a needlepoint of ice. The dexterous touch that shaped the soul of you, Mingled, to mix, and make you what you are, Magic between the sugar and the spice.
<> When I was younger. Maps were better far To splash your walls with color, and uncoil Prismatic roads to Ind and Zanzibar. Windows may frame a dung-heap, or a line Of laundry jigging drunkenly; but these Were casements opening wide to winds like brine, Cormorant-pinioned winds from perilous seas. I have torn down my maps, and burned, or sown Their lying colors on the lying wind. They cannot cheat me now, since I have known The arduous roads to Zanzibar and Ind, And found those lands of spurious jade and flame As drab and drear as that from which I came. Once the horizon was a lariat, Obedient to the cunning of my wrist. And swaggeringly, the arrogant autocrat Of an arena world, I made it twist A tilting wheel of sinuous necromancy Round heels and head, while, debonair and proud, I vaulted out or in as pleased a fancy Half tipsy with the plaudits of the crowd. My craft has fled me now. The stubborn rope Snarls in mid-air, goes awkwardly asprawl. And the horizon that my urgent hope Claimed for its toy has grown much like a wall, Except, reata-like, it tightens fast, To strangle me inexorably at last. Plough the road under, and nail fast the gate. Let there be tillage where the wheels cut deep. Lay spur and saddle by. The year grows late, And meager time is left to sow and reap. The share will peel the sanded ruts asunder Until no devious clue remains to chart How I rode forth in quest of love and plunder, And how returned, pauper in purse and heart. Plough deep, and harrow well, and seed it thickly. Earth, stubbornly remembering, may reveal This year, perhaps, by twin rows dwarfed and sickly, The sterile heritage of hoof and wheel. Not long, though. Earth forgets. Her old scars swell New harvests now. And may not mine as well?
It's that God again; the sort of deity who doesn't need to use our viruses, our gases or our bombs, when He feels like searing out some thousands of us. Can't you recognise His handwriting in that angular strafe of lightning? Any graphologist would say: &lsquo;Dominating, but creative.&rsquo; That Geordie mother is impersonating him right now, stabbing at the little vertical loaf that was Lot's wife, showing to her daughters how this whole world billows at Jahweh's whorl. I shudder too, still believing it's not nice to touch art, wondering: would that finger, placed on her children's tongues, taste of more than her own salt? For this vast canvas has that old God's finger-print all over it, stirring the too-hot porridge that was Sodom or Gomorrah, she's not saying. Maybe it's too near to home to ask why this great foundry of souls was lit and then put out, as if the generations were a flicking switch: <> It looks like a fleet of dreadnoughts, gone down burning in some massive Corryvreckan. The father stands to one side, slightly bored by all this dried-up daubing, like squares of camouflage between us and the work-starved streets, maybe abashed by Lot's daughters being first offered up to would-be angel-rapers then lying with Lot anyway, drunken in the fells, to give life to Moab and Ben-ammi. Perhaps one daughter no longer equals one angel, and no one's seed now seems to need such preserving. Is he too noting the hot invisible spirtle this kind of God employs for destroying His bowl of bad men? The painting has stopped quivering. The nuclear unit leaves, leaving me to see something further, not Lot's wife as the original fag-hag, caught in a blash of oceanic sperm, nor the Jackson Pollock that John Martin made of his sky, but a single fingerprint, filling the frame, composed of myriads of salty fingertips: a whole city pointing, identifying by their uncowed need to touch, their own refusal to dodge or budge or be extinguished.
Two deck-chairs stamped SS NIGERIA were the best Mum could manage for our small front room. I'd have settled for something more solid like the twelve-foot settee some refugees rescued from a bombed-out Odeon and installed in the council-house next door. Mum declared that our chairs were &lsquo;from better days&rsquo; when father travelled and Britannia ruled pretty well everything south of Liverpool. Dad sucked his pipe till it blackened the walls. &lsquo;Jungle smoke,&rsquo; Mum called it, watching him cut his tobacco straight from the plug. Marooned with his wireless and gas-mask, Dad waited &lsquo;for the end&rsquo;. Of what? The war I'd supposed ... but, looking back, more likely he sensed the end of an age when horizons were infinite and rivers pushed remorselessly inland. Night after night he puffed out smoke like a stranded steamer with an oily stack while, hung above maps of the Russian front, a Pears' print of
No pets in the projects, the lease said, and the contraband salamanders shriveled on my pillow overnight. I remember a Siamese cat, surefooted I was told, who slipped from a window ledge and became a red bundle bulging in the arms of a janitor. This was the law on the night the owl was arrested. He landed on the top floor, through the open window of apartment 14-E across the hall, a solemn white bird bending the curtain rod. In the cackling glow of the television, his head swiveled, his eyes black. The cops were called, and threw a horse blanket over the owl, a bundle kicking. Soon after, lightning jabbed the building, hit apartment 14-E, scattering bricks from the roof like beads from a broken necklace. The sky blasted white, detonation of thunder. Ten years old at the window, I knew then that God was not the man in my mother's holy magazines, touching fingertips to dying foreheads with the half-smile of an athlete signing autographs. God must be an owl, electricity coursing through the hollow bones, a white wing brushing the building.
Such emptiness, devoutly to be wished. Achieved by the Chinese poet and by countless others obscure forever. Their hard-won peace they took with them, leaving a deep silence. And I have none of it. Each was denied what he most wanted, I'm sure. And even she, the object of desire, hungered for what she could not have. Why do our minds invent perfection? Can I not at least imagine the goddess with bad breath? Lust is mortar of pain, the wall we build around ourselves. And how indeed, in that prison, we cower and shiver, comfortless. Brick after clay brick we lay down, walling ourselves in. Yet did not Beauty command us? Should we not worship her? Oh, Beauty and the pain of not having you! Beauty and the pain of not touching you! Beauty and the pain of not falling to my knees, kissing your thighs! Again and again I embark from your shores, alone except for Po Chu-i and Buddha  not much comfort at all and no substitute for your softness glimpsed and your eyes burning. Go in peace. Give what you may where you may. I deserve nothing. I kiss your hand across oceans.
Your torso will lengthen, thin, become as smooth as a bark canoe moving effortlessly over bodies of water I will never know. When you meet friends one by one you will tell the story of how we tried to live on air that thickened year after year. You will hear that I have left for that junction of mountain and desert. There, I will try to carry what I need on my back, and I will fail. This will be a period of singing songs of longing like the canyon wren, whose diminishing call echoed all summer.
Hello, sailor boy, In from the sea! Hello, sailor, Come with me! Come on drink cognac. Rather have wine? Come here, I love you. Come and be mine. Lights, sailor boy, Warm, white lights. Solid land, kid. Wild, white nights. Come on, sailor, Out o' the sea. Let's go, sweetie! Come with me.
Imagine a world where what we take for negative Is seen as positive, where the charges that repel us Become attractive, where our desperation is delight; Imagine a photographic negative of life on earth, Where images are all reversed, where bankers dress In pin-striped red, and fast women all wear blue; Think of a universe taking place in the interstices Of ours, the very opposite of our grim fabulations, An alternative occurring every instant and everywhere; Think of things as Paul Dirac imagined them in 1935. Perhaps such a world exists, although the evidence Is slight, is found only in evanescences that hover At the periphery of what we see, unstable particles Equally intangible to the fantastic idea itself; But suppose that place exists, and the possibilities That have leaked out of this life are abundant there, The future otherwise, the people different than what we are. If you could find it, could reach that necessary place, It would, of course, explode, destroying itself and you, For the world of antimatter is fragile as the one we know; But O suppose that world exists, within us, around us, A world to balance the imperfections we have made, An inaccessible, bizarre utopia with its own objects, Subject to other laws, fated to another end, pursuing Some other vision concomitant with our own.
Hour by hour the storm deepened. He read, not much, less than most days, and watched the wind driving the snow in its circle, mountain to mountain, forty miles around. He was o.k., nothing wrong. But he knew  and knew he could not stop knowing  he was trapped, couldn't go down, would lose his trail in storm, the red-gashed blazes blown out. He'd end in the lowland thickets, frozen. Today what he had chosen had chosen him. He tended the stove, refilled the kettle with snow, drank tea, watched blue smoke from his stovepipe twist downward with writhing swiftness into the trees, recounted his cigars, shuffled the letters he'd brought to answer. Whiteness trickled under the door, hoarfrost grew on the nailheads. He tested the harness of his snowshoes, cold greased leather. At sunset unexpected color-of-pewter shone for five minutes in the western notch. Then he lit the lamp. It flickered, teased by the wind hunting through the walls, so that the glass blackened and the flame, without shrinking, became remote, an orange specter. He listened. Now at night the storm seemed unrelated, an absolute, the unseen whole of otherness out there. His light was a dusky ovoid floating at the top of the lamp on darkness. In time he got up, stiff and cold, and leaned over the lamp and blew it out.
for weeks I have been wanting to write this poem that would muffle my life with the horoscope of flowers that would join with rivers rushing along that would bolt and break up sentences mid- bolt and break impressively like mid-air somersaults from high-wire freedom eyes can scarcely capture to enrapture whirling words and abstract dervishes asplash in gutland reappraisal of the light we barely share because for weeks I have been wanting to make my move (as the saying goes) but the travel agents advise against traveling unarmed and the route is dark with ideas I can no longer calmly interpret and this afternoon I noticed there are more onions than garlic underneath the sink will a poem help me (
On a kitchen chair in the grass at Stifford's Bridge, the cataracts still on his eyes, the poet Bunting dozed in the afternoon, bored with the talk of the state of literature that year, sinking away under it to his preferred parish among old names, long reckonings; but roused at the sound of good news and surfacing with a rush, a grunt of delight from centuries down: &lsquo;What? Has the novel blown over at last, then?&rsquo;
Sweet brother, if I do not sleep My eyes are flowers for your tomb; And if I cannot eat my bread, My fasts shall live like willows where you died. If in the heat I find no water for my thirst, My thirst shall turn to springs for you, poor traveller. Where, in what desolate and smokey country, Lies your poor body, lost and dead? And in what landscape of disaster Has your unhappy spirit lost its road? Come, in my labor find a resting place And in my sorrows lay your head, Or rather take my life and blood And buy yourself a better bed  Or take my breath and take my death And buy yourself a better rest. When all the men of war are shot And flags have fallen into dust, Your cross and mine shall tell men still Christ died on each, for both of us. For in the wreckage of your April Christ lies slain, And Christ weeps in the ruins of my spring: The money of Whose tears shall fall Into your weak and friendless hand, And buy you back to your own land: The silence of Whose tears shall fall Like bells upon your alien tomb. Hear them and come: they call you home.
O thou new comer who seek'st Rome in Rome And find'st in Rome no thing thou canst call Roman; Arches worn old and palaces made common, Rome's name alone within these walls keeps home. Behold how pride and ruin can befall One who hath set the whole world 'neath her laws, All-conquering, now conquer&egrave;d, because She is Time's prey and Time consumeth all. Rome that art Rome's one sole last monument, Rome that alone hast conquered Rome the town, Tiber alone, transient and seaward bent, Remains of Rome. O world, thou unconstant mime! That which stands firm in thee Time batters down, And that which fleeteth doth outrun swift time.
Out of the tangle at Trieste of tramlines and memories, I scramble like smoke from an oil: Giacomo Joyce taught English there, moved his mind a little out of the light that, hitting Dublin's pavements at its own angle, blinds the recorder's eye. I learn perspective thus, looking through train windows; cross the lagoon's nuchal rail-line to Venice again. The Grand Canal folds like a child's legs, sat easy for the camera in the white of my grandfather's arms, against his garden fence. We buy two seahorses where the motorboats land, dried so that their tails form fragile involutions. The map of this city has fallen on my mind as softly as a spider's web, catching on the face. Its roads are made of stinking glass. A woman chalks hopscotch on the Campo for a child, then hops.
Dealt with reality is better to be with Without dealing with reality nothing is sure Be sure to be in reality Be sure your plans are reality. Is Joe Tex in a real world? Ask Joe Tex. Is Texas in a real world. Well, only partially. Reality What is around What abounds from all out the ground What you bees around, the real the answers the cold wall the warm heart, deal with it. Deal with the splash of claws calls itself a wind or woman deal with that. What you want to happen can only happen in reality What you want to be you can only really be in reality Dream world sideways Dream world full of shadows and edges Faces and hands in the real world Words words in the real world are real words names of things names of Actions, doings, ongoing realities Nothing is worth nothing save in reality I want the world a beautiful reality And everyone alive in it in love with beautiful reality And reality God truth, what ever you dig to say about it, tho you dig that saying deals not save in reality through realities ... dont get away from that ... reality that we all must work to force reality into reality
There they were stuck dog and bitch halving the compass Then when with his yip they parted oh how frolicsome she grew before him playful dancing and how disconsolate he retreated hang-dog she following through the shrubbery
There she was. While the flare of the August sky darkened and twilight deepened, deepening the field, while the evening star came holily out, she tended the fire by the edge of the woods, a young woman both dark and fair, moving among these natural things, the fire, the woods, the star, and the distant mountains, barefoot and wearing a sweatshirt, a skirt that fell loosely over her thighs, she who was strong in her sex, with her hair loosened, a figure of sturdiness in the female way, bending as she stirred the beans in the blackened pot or walked in darkening grass with a bucket on her hip or split firesticks with her axe; and I saw a scene of ten thousand years ago or maybe ten thousand to come; and she also must have thought of time, for she pointed to the star, and her voice was distinct on the twilit air, &ldquo;Look at the star now, look at a thing that was always there.&rdquo; I do look. And I see her, and she is there. Others too, her husband, Rose Marie and the Bo; but for one moment, or forever, I see only her, her and the star and the fire and the woods and the mountains, a pure moment from an existence in the other consciousness where time is stilled and no fear is felt. Firelight and starlight and woman, complete and beautiful, for only one place is known, ever, and this is there, meaning beauty, meaning all that is human in one fathoming, the passion of mind, the reflectiveness of spirit. I do not know, on this shore of a shadowed field in the shadow of my old age, what else a man lives for.
Fog's edging in. The air's chill as a churchyard slab. I stare into a bleak launderette. A girl with a push chair shivers in a square of light thrown by a caf&eacute; window. &lsquo;I've nothing spare a coin!&rsquo; Her Irish burr clings; her face is grey as cold porridge. Her child's lost in sleep, mouth ajar. I open my purse  little comfort in this. Others press from the dark with jagged demands. Taking refuge in &lsquo;The Happy Bite&rsquo; I breathe greasy warmth, gulp mouthfuls of soggy doughnut, can't dislodge the thin girl. Her hopelessness brings back mine: days when I peeled potatoes, foot rocking the crying cot; how I blubbered that time the dolls' pram slid from my hands down a gully in the glen ... Red and sickly, jam spurts. I see it's the blood missing from the homeless girl's cheeks and swill down tea that's thick with longlife milk to kill the taste; but it sticks to my tongue.
Bright tears huddled in thought, the curse said We are alone, We have no stars. The hair streaming as she ran in all ways like the sun showed us a circle we were, or were center of, &amp; all our rapture then took us from each other &amp; we ran. The stars are our circumference. Even as she spoke her lovers were leaving, long dresses composed on their limbs as they went. That is, melody, or the drawn lines sometimes scratched on pottery to make full use of the curve, to reproduce the drift of their clothes against them as they ran. It all was about going &amp; being gone.
<> For there the lights are few and low; And who are there to see by them, Or what they see, we do not know. Poor strangers of another tongue May now creep in from anywhere, And we, forgotten, be no more Than twilight on a ruin there. We two, the remnant. All the rest Are cold and quiet. You nor I, Nor fiddle now, nor flagon-lid, May ring them back from where they lie. No fame delays oblivion For them, but something yet survives: A record written fair, could we But read the book of scattered lives. There'll be a page for Leffingwell, And one for Lingard, the Moon-calf; And who knows what for Clavering, Who died because he couldn't laugh? Who knows or cares? No sign is here, No face, no voice, no memory; No Lingard with his eerie joy, No Clavering, no Calverly. We cannot have them here with us To say where their light lives are gone, Or if they be of other stuff Than are the moons of Ilion. So, be their place of one estate With ashes, echoes, and old wars,  Or ever we be of the night, Or we be lost among the stars.
I lie where silence sleeps,  And twilight dreams and sighs; Where all heaven's azure peeps  Blue from one wildflower's eyes; Where, in reflecting deeps,  A world, inverted, lies, Of dimmer woods and skies: Divining God from things  Humble as weed and bee; From songs the wild bird sings  Guessing at poetry; And from each flower that swings,  Each star-familiar tree, Learning philosophy.
last october my uncle lester died. his wife, my aunt by blood, told me to take, keep his onyx ring. i was given a watch often worn by him also, a very simple watch no ghost to the watch and i wore it. i made an omen of the ring. i don't know why  the blackness of the stone bothered me, i initially made that into a simple sign. also: a man came to the house of the aged on the second day of the wake, seemed to want, my aunt took me aside and said, some other ring of lester's a war ring, a service ring, and at the funeral home the same man seemed a little drunk and i sat and watched him spend time over the open casket, almost hunting for a ring. he didn't get it, even though he took my uncle's dead hand and held it like a little wing for a second in his drunkenness felt like he was examining the living. my aunt always takes me aside and away to tell me things, but i couldn't ask her about my ring i was given a large old family bible too, with a ledger in the back page listing the birth and death dates of the ten brothers and sisters in my mother's family. i took a few deeds too old land in carleton the family had bought in 1917.
After a night of opium and alcohol, Edgar Poe Walks out of a laundry into the harsh sunlight Of an affluent Baltimore. From behind, as I see him, He is not Of experience, and he is without sin  He waddles In the archetype of Charlie Chaplin And crosses the street to the park Where yesterday evening yellow swathes of poison Were dropped on the wind To kill an unprecedented population Of ground snails. Now, Poe is reaching the great lawn of the park Where swans have been feasting On the tainted snails. The swans are sick. Poe, drugged as he is, Shatters with this vision of vomiting swans. He turns, And running at him In a line fifty yards long Is a pack of stray dogs from everywhere In Baltimore. They will eat the swans. Edgar Allan Poe, who stood between them, Made a judgment  The hounds of hell were coming for him; He climbed the statue of a stylish general On a rearing horse. He clung to the marble thigh of the stallion. He watched, in horror, the field below him. The torn swans were long syllables Over the ground. By the time he was able to climb down, A crowd had formed. He told them, wide-eyed, He told them what he saw truth and beauty Fornicating on the public lawn. Everyone frowned As they sometimes will in Baltimore.
Sunned and pruned, this Spanish rose performs its brilliant death in the arena of high June, its secret: brevity and a thorn  red-caped and dangerous as any matador's.
Grinnin' an' singin' an' a hard-on in yo' pants you gentle black boy what you been takin'? where'd you get it 'cause I'm hard up to be hard up. I used to know a song but I swallowed in my throat. Ladies, don't get scairt out o' your silly wits he's high an' I am curlin' limp between my legs. When I was ten and five I would've sprang alive! an'  my inspiration.
Pink confused with white flowers and flowers reversed take and spill the shaded flame darting it back into the lamp's horn petals aslant darkened with mauve red where in whorls petal lays its glow upon petal round flamegreen throats petals radiant with transpiercing light contending above the leaves reaching up their modest green from the pot's rim and there, wholly dark, the pot gay with rough moss.
Ideals are like the stars, Always above our reach. Humbly I tried to learn, More humbly did I teach. On all honest virtues I sought to keep firm hold. I wanted to be a good man Though I pinched my soul. But now I lie beneath cool loam Forgetting every dream; And in this narrow bed of earth No lights gleam. In this narrow bed of earth Star-dust never scatters, And I tremble lest the darkness teach Me that nothing matters.
The church was locked, so I went to the incumbent  the incumbent enjoying a supine incumbency  a tennis court, a summerhouse, deckchairs by the walnut tree and only the hum of the bees in the rockery. &ldquo;May I have the keys of the church, your incumbency?&rdquo; &ldquo;Yes, my dear sir, as a moderate churchman, I am willing to exchange: light Sunday duty:  nice district: pop 149: eight hundred per annum: no extremes: A and M: bicyclist essential: same income expected.&rdquo; &ldquo;I think I'm the man that you want, your incumbency. Here's my address when I'm not on my bicycle, poking   about for recumbent stone effigies  14, Mount Ephraim, Cheltenham, Glos: Rector St. George-in-the-Rolling Pins, Cripplegate: non resident pop in the City of London: eight fifty per annum (but verger an asset): willing to exchange (no extremes) for incumbency, similar income, but closer to residence.&rdquo;
This is a slice of the oldest Tree the world has known. When this outside ring grew in the forest Chainsaws and a tractor brought it down. When the tree's husk was this narrow ring, Washington's troops were shivering; In this ring's year the Tartar horde Drenched earth with blood of the conquered; In this year, a black ring  As a cross was a tree hung; Gilgamesh journeyed toward the dark When this ring swelled beneath the bark; When sap rose here the tree was great With blossom, with unfallen fruit; Here, fed by roots that reached far down To suck milk out of the earth, These heartwood rings grew firm. Their girth Braced high boughs, and a spreading crown Held unchanging stars as leaves; The tree propped up the heavens And gods drowsed in its shade Then, before time was made. These dates of interest are each marked now On the cracked disc by a cardboard arrow.
For you, the carnival meant a blazing wheel of light flared over a farming town of faces from the high school yearbook. So when the carnival came to the city, you hooked my elbow and tugged me, mannequin of civil disobedience, to the fairgrounds. There I shot 21 straight baskets, spin, flip, quarter a throw, to win a stuffed parrot that you grabbed like a childhood without calluses. Three AM now, as you sleep, I puzzle at evaporated days when my fingertips could read the grain of the ball like holy Braille, when I could squeeze a planet in my sure hands and flip it through a hoop.
Crackling like fear in the child's heart late awakened, the parents have gone into nightmare, on the night lake of darkness far away are carried, and the house dreadfully closes. It smiles like dawn in the wide western window. No one believes this ever. But there is glass-flutter. There is wind hungering and the far sister of the aspen trying to crawl. Then it will be seen to leap the ridge distance, going entirely. Something has come in the dark, touching. But the air wonderfully now is sheepish and light lacquers all. Snow-light nearly, down, the singlet of geese travelers, something like a word from the north, this wholeness fully breathable heaping its handful of gray on the ground. Like mist and fog from a mill town rising as if the earth had been just created, as it has, and memory's hand opening above the coverlet, and the family mouth open and all over.
John Landless sailing on a helmless boat Through waveless oceans towards shoreless sands Lands on a dawnless day at a townless port Knocks at a houseless door with his boneless hands Yet he remembers well these ancient galleys These ageless slaves these steamless steamers These barless streets these gazeless windows These sleepless walls these godless dreamers He knows this woman without faith and face Who combs the curls of her fallen hair He knows her restless bed her fireless embrace Her love without desire and despair He wonders why the cranes don't stop to load Why they load caskets and the newborn grain The wrathless lemons and the joyless wines Why they load coal and unload ash again This leather never will be shoe This cotton never bandage the soldiers This lumber will not heat the homeless This wheat never feed the paupers But who is he this nameless passenger Who was not born and has no right to die No reason to embark or disembark But who is he this passenger without a lie?
Woodsmoke, and in those soft legal hollows nothing but the sanest odours; even at sundown nothing but the gentlest scents. Then the young girl flows in out of the twilight, hair streaming, part of her streaming, breasts held like breath and yet swelling, arms withheld, aching, yet waiting, so, like a river, into the deep light room. Where now light possesses her. Eyes harden to reflectors. Angers stagnate in her throat. No speech but a cry. Then a slammed door. Leaving the mother who has done so little  fetched a daysoaked shirt out of the basin, offered her chicken and rice, smiled at her vaguely, or kindly, over some wall of book who, pinioned by a small stony shadow, can be nothing but reproach to her. Withering slimness. Closed volume of slimness. Nothing but reproach to her. Declaration of fear.
The flaked racing breath did not say it: <> <> Blue robes hung down our white door. On the wall Romans tussled near the pyramid of Cestius, heater chuffing, easing. Brown arms piled angles and enigmas, one body both advanced and fled, one was the arrogant rider. Blue on great white: ours was patience, theirs amber, on skin, stone, air. Danced conflict, half-sorted melee, one of them king and fallen, one thrust out of his city. Snow blotted up the panes. Each hour carves a circle through whiteness, and a line through time's honeyed no-color. Between them, bodies swirl to birth. Hours incise each circle, snow filling it, and each line, once only. Between, the world's bedded forms stir unrobed and emerging, the rider surges away, contempt lifts him and the king quails, an elder croaks malediction, the new exile sees life stretch out, robes divide white from white, the towering pine and bed collect blue, white, and great patience, bodies tenderness and exile. Circling groove slowly filling and line arrowing without bend, had your geometer set us at the cut more keenly yet two others it was, cloudily greater, bent on their veering purposes, who achieved it, blue tearing from white: as a captain through days gazing at butchery misted in cordite becomes the army, while at the far end of that arc an inkbrush master, hour on hour at his mountain, the veiled life-giver, becomes its few soaking lines.
<> The loom's behavior: how the edge Once the thread pulled, raveled the mutual soul, And how each night, with the night's pledge How to set, herself, the mutual task again. He wove his piece with troubled eyes, Astonished at the strands of pain Until with practice he grew clumsy-wise. She like an adept, quarreled and sang; You might have enjoyed to see her face; Lit by such zest from the first pang, So poison-sure from the first embrace. But both were broken-hearted she With a deadly touch she could not quit Worked the design to the end, and he Thought only he was to blame for it. While she, so poison-ardent and so deft Traced in their love a fair picture of his pain; Right hand the subtle assassin to her left: Told all the mean geometry of her brain. Judge here, you, lyric and imitative lovers, Who take emotions from a book by rote, What brand of poison this was. Let who first discovers Name for this evil, plan an antidote.
They would call on him at Pennsbury, His Manor House beside the River, With feathers at their ears and quivered flints, Loin clouts hanging from their waists on thongs, With ceremonious step of moccasin Upon the graveled walks between shrub roses Past topiary trees. At the end of the Garden Miquon (as they called their friend) arises To greet them: He, still lean and strong, the courtier, And they like Romans, now salute each other. His servants hasten to attend them: Tables Of buckwheat cakes on platters, sides of venison Are prepared and trundled out. Meantime The Proprietor and his guests in contests vie, He leaping on the lawn as they leap: They leap far from a standing start But he, Miquon, their good friend and host, He leaps farther, to their cheers.
<> And so they found him out a lower room Where sophomoric clatter never came Along the musty academic hall And set up there his tall, dun-colored desk Beside the blackboard. There he sat and taught His group of meek, stoop-shouldered graduates, Mouthing the accents of a dozen tongues And writing out their symbols on the board: &ldquo;The Indo-European root stands  Whence came the Sanskrit  And next by consonantal change we have It  Today a word or two sums up the tale In common talk &rdquo; Slowly his palsied hands, Like twisted roots of dwarfed, storm-riven trees That clutched the black and prehistoric soil Where Attila lashed forth his Huns to war, Traced characters uncouth, dark roots of words, And from the fragments of forgotten speech Drew mystic laws of language, setting up His letters, like tin soldiers, in a row Invincible to ordinary minds. The continent had left its double mark Upon him, in the heavy knotted scarf And high, stiff collar, with the wings turned up (Style of old Leipsig and of Heidelberg) And in the faded wrinkle of a scar Along his chin, from student-duel days Before the classroom corner was his throne. He faced the sunset through his latter years As rugged as a cloistered Gothic tower Above some weather-grey monastic shrine That sepulchered old books of learned lore, Long treasured, till the archway crumbled in Where time crept under, gnawing at the stone. Strangers who pass the cemetery wall See only that the barren earth gleams bare And ashy, where the flowers have slipped away To dust, and there is none to read aright Within the bookish college fireside glow Ungraven epitaphs:  <> <> <> <> <> <> <>
I saw a tree in Georgia shining in the sun. &ldquo;Pretty, Mama, pretty!&rdquo; Run, child, run. Ticket for the train wheels, clackety-clack. &ldquo;Want to ride up front, Mama!&rdquo; Hush, child, back. Passed a lunchroom counter steaming and hot. &ldquo;Hungry, Mama, hungry!&rdquo; Dream that you're not. Went up North to Heaven, walked for the longest spell. &ldquo;Tired, Mama, let's go inside!&rdquo; Don't ring the front bell. Gets cold up North in Heaven, hungry in Heaven, too. &ldquo;What shall we do now, Mama?&rdquo; I wish I knew. &ldquo;Where do I study to be a doctor, or take a law degree? &ldquo;Office worker or teacher, Mama?&rdquo; We'll see, soon we'll see. Man all bent and broken, woman scrubbing floors. &ldquo;Whose terrible faces, Mama?&rdquo; Mine, child, and yours.
We, who must grow old and staid, Full of wisdom, much afraid, In our hearts like flowers keep Love for you until we sleep. You the brave, and you the young You of a thousand songs unsung, Burning brain, and ardent word, You the lovely and absurd. Say, on that Galician plain Are you arguing again? Does a trench or ruined tree Hear your &lsquo;O, I  We, who must grow staid and old, Full of caution, worn and cold, In our hearts, like flowers keep Your image, till we also sleep.
so that's what it's like to be a wheel so that's what it's like to be tied to one of its spokes while the rim screeches while the hub grinds so that's what it's like to have the earth and heaven confused to speak of the stars on the road of stones churning in the icy sky to suffer as the wheel suffers to bear its unimaginable weight if only it were a honing wheel I would have its sparks to see by if only it were a mill stone I would have bread to keep my mouth busy if only it were a roulette wheel my left eye would watch its right dance in it so that's what it's like to be chained to the wounded rib of a wheel to move as the hearse moves to move as the lumber truck moves down the mountains at night what do you think my love while the wheel turns I think of the horse out in front how the snowflakes are caught in his mane how he shakes his beautiful blindfolded head I think how in the springtime two birds are pulling us along as they fly how one bird is a crow and the other a swallow I think how in the summertime there's no one out there except the clouds in the blue sky except the dusk in the blue sky I think how in autumn there's a man harnessed out there a bearded man with the bit stuck in his mouth a hunchback with a blanket over his shoulders hauling the wheel heavy as the earth don't you hear I say don't you hear the wheel talk as it turns I have the impression that it's hugging me closer that it has maternal instincts that it's telling me a bedtime story that it knows the way home that I grit my teeth just like my father I have the impression that it whispers to me how all I have to do to stop its turning is to hold my breath
Children, children, come and look Through the crack in the corner of the middle of the world At the clockwork man in a cardboard house. He's crying, children, crying.   Once he was new like you, you see Through the crack in the corner of the middle of the night, The bright blue man on the wind-up sea, Oh, he went so beautifully.   O cruel was the pleasure-land they never should have painted On the front and the back, the funny brand of weather, For the crack in the corner of the middle of the picture Let the colours leak away.   One at a time, children, come and look Through the crack in the corner of the middle of the day At Jack-in-the-Boat where the light leaves float. He's dying of a broken spring.
We are looking for a worm in the apple  that fruit which ever since Eden has been susceptible to frost or appetite. The doctor shows me aerial photographs, moonscapes of craters and lakes, faults in the surface I might fall through one day valleys where every shadow could mean total eclipse. This is just a base line, he says as if my body were a camp you could start climbing from. In the mountains they dream of snow and listen for avalanche. I think of Amazon women with just one breast, their bowstrings tightening for war. (How will we ever touch again?) You're fine, the doctor tells me now and smiles, as if he could give innocence back, as if he could give back to the apple its spiraled skin.
<> Solemn in late summer, Large as yellow panes Beyond, beyond the blond hay. Smell of hay and dust Warm and the stars solemn. Dust under quiet foot, Stubble and gleaning strown. Harvester standing with stars, Hulk of iron passive Next the stacks of threshed wheat, The ricks, the rakes and the sacks. Nestle here. Take your rest. If a katydid cries, if a toad Makes a dark sound or a rustle Take it for accent of ease: Work done; dust down; Harvest home; planet warm. And stars like large drops of water. First we worked and then we rested. Peace.
Loads of trash and we light the match; what can be in a cardboard box can be in the bed of the pickup and you jostle the containers onto the side road. A match for this little road, and a match for your son riding next to you firing, and a match for the hole in the land filled with trees. I will not mention concrete because theirs is the meshed wire of concrete near the docks, and the concrete of burned trees cut in cords of change-sawing, and we will light a match to this too. Work in anger for the final hour of adjustment to the surveyors, and to the lawyers speaking of squatting, and the land burning to no one. This building of scrap metal, high as the storm that will break it totally in the tornado dust, and to the animals that have lived in the wheathay of their bedding will beg for the cutting edge, or the ax, or the electrified fencing that warms them in summer rain. My son coughs on the tarred scrubble of cut trees, and is cursed by the firelight, and beckoned to me to the pickup, and washed of the soot of his sootskinned face, and the dirt at the corners of my daughter's mouth will be trenchmouth; and the worn moccasin of my woman will tear into the bulbed	big toe, and the blood will be black as the compost pile burning, and the milk from her dugs will be the balm for the trenchmouth, as she wipes her mouth from the smoke of the landfill filled with fire, and these loads of trash will be the ashes for her to take: and will be taken to the landfill, and filled, and filled.
The azure yielder of the skylark's way or the foam ceaselessly re-created made into ultimate marble there where the mediterranean navel imposes its majesty and casts precious strokes of gold upon cheeks advanced by Sirius between two breasts that give hard commands to the wind asleep in the blue shepherding slowness between her thighs now that I part them a siesta to see her strictly disciplined horizontals crowds forges vineyard country instant shadows glaciers blueblue cocks of weather vanes when their noble bellies isolate the flow of the ocean as the young huntress sleeps and a birch tree quickens upon her knees.
He learned to breathe in German but no one gave him a seat on the subway. Trying times continued on his walk through the park, daffodils and dangerous birds. Morning at the museums and angels buzzed impudently above the garbage, the sweet smell of refuse sufficient. His Italian was better than that. He could not account for his whereabouts the night he disappeared. The police don't really care: they have a routine. He cannot leave his apartment without peering first through the curtain with a Dantean sense of doom. In the future I will live in the past he said to himself in Spanish. The smell of politics followed him down the streets of a major Central American capital, tall secret policemen watched his progress, his ambiguous back. During his most angelic dream he awoke in Farsi while the rugs around him flew. Like butterflies. The room filled with Persian carpets flapping. Agonized women leaned down toward his face to whisper secrets of his recent past.
To put on shoes and be sophisticated  it really was a creamy trumpet Miles Davis made or gleam waxy and smile along the El-shadowed street through all the synaesthesias of weary language patient, at our command, like an old dog. Faithful animal! Endure Tehran, Stella by Starlight, Nautilus machines, the skanky fantasies of men no longer young, the rough edge of graffiti, borrowed vices of exurban novelists, the price of glass. Break me. Come to me with burrs in your fur, tell me where everything has ever been. Growl at me if I sleep, wake me with your dependable craziness. Birds plummet and you fetch them wet from your mouth. Women weep in San Francisco. Only you are ever different.
To lie back under the tallest oldest trees. How far the stems rise, rise before ribs of shelter open! To live in the mercy of God. The complete sentence too adequate, has no give. Awe, not comfort. Stone, elbows of stony wood beneath lenient moss bed. And awe suddenly passing beyond itself. Becomes a form of comfort. Becomes the steady air you glide on, arms stretched like the wings of flying foxes. To hear the multiple silence of trees, the rainy forest depths of their listening. To float, upheld, as salt water would hold you, once you dared. To live in the mercy of God. To feel vibrate the enraptured waterfall flinging itself unabating down and down to clenched fists of rock. Swiftness of plunge, hour after year after century, O or Ah uninterrupted, voice many-stranded. To breathe spray. The smoke of it. Arcs of steelwhite foam, glissades of fugitive jade barely perceptible. Such passion  rage or joy? Thus, not mild, not temperate, God's love for the world. Vast flood of mercy flung on resistance.
The serpent was a risky incarnation Which panned out badly for the human soul Because its joy was jealous, and its ration Incontinently post-imperial. The couple was a daring incarnation In the diversity of its several sin, To seek self-knowledge, and in explanation To argue with itself and then give in. The martyr was a desperate incarnation That drove its patient suffering to the wall Bearing the tree and flesh, and in duration Being the blasted brother of us all. The child is an impatient incarnation In whom aggression clamors without fear, Self-knowledge murmurs, pathos in elation Cries to its wide sympathos everywhere. And now the bird is given its incarnation, The spirit on its wing, the wing in flight, The flight empyreal and of a station Space-centerd, space-patrolled, and out of sight. While it wins back to heaven, and heaven incarnate Spins on the sphere whose light we cannot see, Our failed flesh labors in an earthly landscape The preconceptions of its deity.
My friend Janet Landsweir had a disease of the spine. For one year she had to stay in bed lying on a board with her back absolutely level. I stopped by after school, bringing books from the library. She was reading more and more: <> <> Snow fell on dark evergreens outside her window the day we began  she one page, I another, the first charmed sentences of our lives: The heroine at the ball refused to dance with the condescending hero, who turned silently away, although &ldquo; ...his was not a slight, thin inclination.&rdquo; Life! It was going to be more complex, and more irresistible than anything we had ever imagined. It felt huge as Janet, flat-out white on the bed, cleared her throat and began reading where I'd left off.
fearlessandbosomy this grand:gal who liked men horses roses &amp; $(in that order)is wHISpEr it left;at the age of 8 ysomethi ng (imagine) with,pansies
The shoemaker sat in the cellar's dusk beside his bench and sewing-machine, his large, blackened hands, finger tips flattened and broad, busy. Through the grating in the sidewalk over his window, paper and dust were falling year by year. At evening Passover would begin. The sunny street was crowded. The shoemaker could see the feet of those who walked over the grating. He had one pair of shoes to finish and he would be through. His friend came in, a man with a long, black beard, in shabby, dirty clothes, but with shoes newly cobbled and blacked. &ldquo;Beautiful outside, really the world is beautiful.&rdquo; A pot of fish was boiling on the stove. Sometimes the water bubbled over and hissed. The smell of the fish filled the cellar. &ldquo;It must be beautiful in the park now. After our fish we'll take a walk in the park.&rdquo; The shoemaker nodded. The shoemaker hurried his work on the last shoe. The pot on the stove bubbled and hissed. His friend walked up and down the cellar in shoes newly cobbled and blacked.
I am trying to decide to go swimming, But the sea looks so calm. All the other boys have gone in. I can't decide what to do. I've been waiting in my tent Expecting to go in. Have you forgotten to come down? Can I escape going in? I was just coming I was just going in But lost my pail A boisterous tide is coming up; I was just looking at it. The pail is near me again. My shoulders have sand on them. Round the edge of the tide Is the shore. The shore Is filled with waves. They are tin waves. Boisterous tide coming up. The tide is getting less. Daytime is not a brain, Living is not a cricket's song. Why does light diffuse As earth turns away from the sun? I want to give my food To a stranger. I want to be taken. What kind of a face do I have while leaving? I'm thinking of my friend. I am trying to go swimming But the sea looks so calm All boys are gone I can't decide what to do I've been waiting to go Have you come down? Can I escape I am just coming Just going in
In my mind's eye the men were talking politics. I could see the stacks of the Fermi atomic plant looming in gray smoke, a distant evil castle. A broken highway marked the entrance to the city like the road Christ crawled to his death on. That was in my mind's eye. In the eye of my body the moisture of your kiss flowed through me. That first instant when we love! I opened the door, and you were there, sitting in a red silk shirt at a table in the corner, your hair modestly loose around your face as if you had turned, once more, away from the world. You didn't want to be seen, but turned toward me, half-stood, our hands reached, loosened to each other's arms, then I came upon your lips. I have tasted so few women  But I kept my mouth there, and you kept your mouth there. I took in what made me want to love forever, to be lost in folds and turns and follow to the meaning. You are a woman. I wanted that gravity of the buttocks, that pushing up of the lungs, liquid of all your liquid forms, with one kiss your liquids washed me. I am stuck. One touch of your lips has stunned.
Owain was ill today. In the night He was delirious, shouting of lions In the sleepless heat. Today, dry And pale, he took a paper circle, Laid it on the grass which held it With curling fingers. In the still Centre he pushed the broken bean Stick, gathering twelve fragments Of stone, placed them at measured Distances. Then he crouched, slightly Trembling with fever, calculating The mathematics of sunshine. He looked up, his eyes dark, Intelligently adult as though The wave of fever taught silence And immobility for the first time. Here, in his enforced rest, he found Deliberation, and the slow finger Of light, quieter than night lions, More worthy of his concentration. All day he told the time to me. All day we felt and watched the sun Caged in its white diurnal heat, Pointing at us with its black stick.
our children, tomorrow's black earth people need some images, images of you, me, us, what we are, what we look like in the morning serving them righteous food what we look like sweeping the floor, carrying out the trash (look out brother you got to use both hands down) what we look like after taking a bath, while talking quietly to each other our chilren's eyes are flash bulbs fast cameras developing time after time faster than any film polaroid has on the market the pictures hanging up on the walls of their minds and in the albums of their heads are important pictures we can't allow them to fade i realize wearing a natural might not mean much to you, just another fashion, a hip head way but to a little girl with thick black hair it means our world, our world's life style for tomorrow, it means what we are and gonna be the next time you open your mouth picture your child saying what you say the next time, picture your child being just like you and see if that flash image you develop of yourself is the picture worth a thousand words or just another brownie nigger snapshot
Measure by your footsteps, sd the voice, the days will follow after. He compared his. He sd: counted is the end of the earth, look, twelve footsteps. Plus one where I stand. And the sky and the land leaned over. In the air there is no death. Man is thirteen. In the cloud-mist of himself. Thirteen added, Seven added, One. At 20, he raised his voice: its basis, the sun asked. And got no answer, for the hollows were still buried, the dawn had not yet come Anger came after man. And the ability to count. So there were days, there were suns. This is the count of them.
Mouth of artifice fashioned to make mouth-talk. Not formal. Familiar. The tablecloth  falls,   legs rest on the floor;  draperies of the design everywhere of the most temporary: it is made It has motion:  the floor a wind propelled by the thought of a fan   (happy the world so made  as to be  blessed by the modes of art) driven by fan blades and their dark eddies,  wave-patterns that convert into mouth-talk.
As we eat crushed strawberry ice under a bee-heavy vine we watch for the seamstress to come. Through the open doorway we hear her chatter, see her Singers glint with gold roses in the dark room. Embroidery cloths abandoned at the roadside table; a weir of lace falls from her chair; silks spill blossoming from a basket. Under its turning ribbon of gauze her tea cools in a white cup. She sings in the dark interior. From the sills of the gardenless house fuchsia and geranium blaze. Her windows are framed with French knots, the cracks seeded with lazy daisy. Her rubber plant reaches the eaves. Nothing troubles the afternoon dust or breaks the tenor of bees but her counterpoint. Out of sight in their web of scaffolding under the bridge, workmen whistle and a hammer rings over water. A fan of shadow slowly includes us. Her tea is cold. Imperceptibly the thicket of roses grows closer. We make out the sinuous gilding of sewing machines, vine leaves, stems and iron tendrils of their treadles. Lace glimmering at dusk. A foam of linen, flowers, silences. Sunlight has flowed from her sills of yellow stone. Bats are shuttling their delicate black silks to mesh that dark doorway on her absence.
Sun bright on powder snow, unnumbered. The classic style never further than the mind away. When the mind had heart. And what have you? Tonality will always come back. What would the music treat or treat the same? a fall from high places, to restore men to their original lowliness with god at the foot of the letter? First the word. No classic urge. Satie tells it, the brass frog that dreams all night of the insects asleep in its mouth. Hieroglyph of this unfallen world caressed around our fall  we fell on sleep, mere sleep and all its dream.
Alas for Man, so stealthily betrayed, Bearing the bad cell in him from the start, Pumping and feeding from his healthy heart That wild disorder never to be stayed When once established, destined to invade With angry hordes the true and proper part, Till Reason joggles in the headsman's cart, And Mania spits from every balustrade. Would he had searched his closet for his bane, Where lurked the trusted ancient of his soul, Obsequious Greed, and seen that visage plain; Would he had whittled treason from his side In his stout youth and bled his body whole, Then had he died a king, or never died.
A blotch of pallor stirs beneath the high Square picture-dusk, the window of dark sky. A sound subdued in the darkness: tears! As if a bird in difficulty up the valley steers. &ldquo;Why have you gone to the window? Why don't you  sleep? How you have wakened me! But why, why do you  weep?&rdquo; &ldquo; <> &ldquo;You have dreamed and are not awake, come here to me.&rdquo; &ldquo; &ldquo;My dear!&rdquo; &ldquo; <> &ldquo;Come!&rdquo; &ldquo; <> &ldquo;Nay, I'm too sleepy!&rdquo; &ldquo; <> &ldquo;I!&rdquo; &ldquo; <> &ldquo;My dear, the night is soft and eternal, no doubt You love it!&rdquo; &ldquo; &ldquo;My dear, when you cross the street in the sunshine, surely Your own small night goes with you. Why treat it so  poorly?&rdquo; &ldquo; &ldquo;Even then it is dark behind you. Turn round, my wife.&rdquo; &ldquo; <>  yours and mine&wblank; &ldquo;In the darkness we all are gone, we are gone with the trees And the restless river; we are lost and gone with all  these.&rdquo; &ldquo; &ldquo;Come back to bed, let us sleep on our mysteries. &ldquo;Come to me here, and lay your body by mine, And I will be all the shadow, you the shine. &ldquo;Come, you are cold, the night has frightened you. Hark at the river! It pants as it hurries through &ldquo;The pine-woods. How I love them so, in their mystery of  not-to-be.&rdquo; &ldquo;  &ldquo;Kiss me! How cold you are! Your little breasts Are bubbles of ice. Kiss me! You know how it rests &ldquo;One to be quenched, to be given up, to be gone in the dark; To be blown out, to let night dowse the spark. &ldquo;But never mind, my love. Nothing matters, save sleep; Save you, and me, and sleep; all the rest will keep.&rdquo;
and there, sir, comes a rehearsal of history when the rings turns purple on the finger of the queen. she takes off in a halo of pain, sick like a lemon and stumbling over the kosher butcher shops of this area. throughout the earth everywhere she is accused of witchcraft and death. her body is well known to many men of her time and it hangs over them like a seal, it marks them for delivery. another seal, smaller, moves inside her seal, it is secret and hot. what queer history floods us, sisters. take matches, for instance, they have been the closest to your dying flesh and yet we don't know one another. the matches light the stove, the food is quietly cooking. guard the virginity of brooklyn. no matter what it holds it is sick.
The word I spoke in anger weighs less than a parsley seed, but a road runs through it that leads to my grave, that bought-and-paid-for lot on a salt-sprayed hill in Truro where the scrub pines overlook the bay. Half-way I'm dead enough, strayed from my own nature and my fierce hold on life. If I could cry, I'd cry, but I'm too old to be anybody's child. <> with whom should I quarrel except in the hiss of love, that harsh, irregular flame?
The purple tulips I bought this week at the Evergood market dip from their brown clay pot like little wolves bringing their throats low to the table, their petals wide open. They are so beautiful, I stand in the hallway a long time looking at them. Who said:  <> And when James comes through the door with his head bowed, when he stands in the porch alone, smoking, I tell him: Come into the living room and look at these tulips. And he does. He sits down in the rocking chair and he looks at them. And when I say: Look how the gold from the stamen has fallen to the inside of the purple petal, so the petal holds it, he says, Yeah, I see that. But he's sad. I think of my father and my brothers. I look at the tulips. And James holds his head in his hands.
It is in its way like bumping into an ex-wife in the lobby of the Ritz. You do not go there often. For her it is a habitat and she togged for it by all of evolution. &ldquo;Bill!&rdquo; she says, &ldquo;how well you look!&rdquo; the grace of all her small-talk is also from evolution: you know how you are looking, have settled for it. What you cannot settle is what to remember of how much you wanted, how little you could at last bear. Like that. Exactly. Everything. All the way in the taxi and train to the other mail slot, through which you fall and lie unread, blaming no one, knowing you were written with nothing to say.
This is not where the rich and famous pursue their lifestyles. This is exactly like the Holiday Inn in Troy, N.Y., where I stayed recently. It is near enough to exactly like the Holiday Inn where I stayed in Tucson, In Casper, in Chillicothe, in Opelika, in Portsmouth, in Bellingham, etc. A mirror in a fake gilt frame, brass bed lamps attached to the wall by hinges. &ldquo;Fax Your Urgent Documents To or From This Holiday Inn Hotel.&rdquo; All at once the smoke alarm goes off for no reason.  Thumps on the door, an anxious black lady. &ldquo;Are you all right in there, sir?&rdquo; I climb on a brocaded chair and disconnect the smoke alarm ruthlessly. Meanwhile rich and famous men are pursuing their lifestyles two blocks away In four-story Federal brick houses with porticoes and flagstone steps. Fucking each other's wives in dens and laundry rooms and pantries. This is called a party. Some are Democrats, some Republicans, all are fuckers. They are emboldened by bourbon and vodka and the anticipation of power. Tomorrow they will arise hungover and wield the resources of the nation. Sweetheart, so far from home I'm thinking of you as much as I can. Melodiously at the door: &ldquo;Are you all right, sir? Are you all right in there?&rdquo;
You have come your way, I have come my way; You have stepped across your people, carelessly, hurting  them all; I have stepped across my people, and hurt them in spite  of my care. But steadily, surely, and notwithstanding We have come our ways and met at last Here in this upper room. Here the balcony Overhangs the street where the bullock-wagons slowly Go by with their loads of green and silver birch-trees For the feast of Corpus Christi. Here from the balcony We look over the growing wheat, where the jade-green  river Goes between the pine-woods, Over and beyond to where the many mountains Stand in their blueness, flashing with snow and the  morning. I have done; a quiver of exultation goes through me, like  the first Breeze of the morning through a narrow white birch. You glow at last like the mountain tops when they catch Day and make magic in heaven. At last I can throw away world without end, and meet you Unsheathed and naked and narrow and white; At last you can throw immortality off, and I see you Glistening with all the moment and all your beauty. Shameless and callous I love you; Out of indifference I love you; Out of mockery we dance together, Out of the sunshine into the shadow, Passing across the shadow into the sunlight, Out of sunlight to shadow. As we dance Your eyes take all of me in as a communication; As we dance I see you, ah, in full! Only to dance together in triumph of being together Two white ones, sharp, vindicated, Shining and touching, Is heaven of our own, sheer with repudiation.
Hoisting yourself From fingerniche to toehold, Approaching the Knife-Edge, A deep shagged ravine gapes on the one side, The eye of a blueberry-silver pool steep Down the dizzydrop other, Your breath short, Each rib rasping, Grasping the thinned air above the timberline, Clinging To the desolate rocks Below the snowline, You can believe As others have believed  This stony ridgepole bracing Heaven the longhouse of the mountain, Ktaadn. You breathe his breath. Hoisting yourself Atop the spined ridge you'll find On a slight plateau Stretching toward the peak's rise <> Beside a spring! you laugh at the surprise Of it and chew in the icy air Bursting berries big as birds' eggs, Your lips and tongue relish the purple  Then arise from feasting On silvery frosted fruit In the desolation To hoist yourself, From fingergrip to toehold Each breath grasping As high up as the mountain allows you.
Condensed stillness lit meanly  at four in the morning. Streetlights a broth of murk,  amber, unhuman ... As I start to describe them, horror begins to trust me. A cheap gold-plated wristwatch, the weakest hand counting seconds between one quartz minute and another. One Two Three Four Five. Spastic stroll without sound. Count five to put these words on paper. Or detonate the eclipse of someone. Smoke is my neighbour's crop, His plot is one of eight clay pots sharing a chimney. Sixteen chimneys grow smoke along the terrace. Look. The wind makes a cat of the smoke; a scuttling black cat, poured velvetly on slate, filters through the rooks' aerial look-out posts to where my sad-eyed neighbour stares heavily at my fence over his fence. He won't watch me watching him toss crumbs to the clever rooks. Television's virtuous wiles.  The immortal sheen of the lovely presenter. She  wraps up an African massacre. Now a panel of benign  communicators ... The waxen head on the pillow  no longer sees. She keeps the set on for company,  but can't press the digits on her other friend  the telephone, silent mostly, on the bedside table. What appeared to be another  filthy rag in the moist alleyway was underfoot slime, cold  nucleic porridge, though one webbed foot protruded   and came away  spelling &lsquo;frog's leg&lsquo;. Two whole scrubbed pigs hanging   hock to hock from hooks in the ceiling: art  in a butcher's display, two evolutionary masterpieces   minus identity. Pieces of nature, not yet part   of the economy. This dream that names itself &lsquo;Landsend Beckoning&lsquo;  is windless, unwooded, surrounded by ashy beaches. A raw spit of land severs us from the sea.  A white-haired black girl invites me to explore. We have been warned of snakes, but see none   only a cave's thready breath and bituminous odour. Long waves wash sideways over the sand,  ribbed and intersecting. &lsquo;They are like leaves,&lsquo; she says. &lsquo;Do you remember leaves?  Now we must learn to swim in their oily rainbows.&lsquo;
You, asleep up there on the flowering Tuscan hill, lying beside your father, among the graveyard grasses, didn't you hear just now a tender voice weeping? It's my child, my little boy, who knocks at your lonely door, he in whose holy name you lived again. Life fled from him also, brother, life so bitter for you. He was playing among bright flower- beds, laughing at light-hearted fancies, when the shadow wrapped him round, and shoved him to your solitary shores. O, down in the darkness, welcome him, since he's small and turns to the sunlight, calling his mother still.
we talk of light things you and I in this small house. no winds stir here among flame orange drapes that drape our genesis And snow melts into rivers. The young grandchild reviews her impudence that makes you laugh and clap for more allure. Ah, how she twirls the emerald lariat. When evening comes your eyes transfer to space you have not known and taste the blood breath of a final flower. Past equal birth, the smell of salt begins another flood: your land is in the ashes of the South. perhaps the color of our losses: perhaps the memory that dreams nurse: old man, we do not speak of crosses.
Float ing ly) i (in Khoury's warm ish )look ing at thousands of winter afternoons,through a sometimes a window In khoury 's womB for Ladies and Gents like Restaurant (always in Whom faces) o ra mi (sleep tick s clock and occasionally upon the) perdreamhapsing (floor cats drift)
In the supermercado the music sweet as the hot afternoon wanders among the watermelons, the melons, the sumptuous tomatoes, and lingers among the tequila bottles, rum bacardi, rompope. It hovers like flies round the butchers handsome and gay, as they dreamily sharpen their knives; and the beautiful girl cashiers, relaxed in the lap of the hot afternoon, breathe in time to the music whether they know it or not  at the glossy supermercado, the super supermercado.
Nijinsky's ashes here in peace repose No more the Faun, the Harlequin, the Rose.  We saw him framed in light before the crowds,  Hushed like a tree that waits the touch of dawn,  A panther ready, or an arrow drawn.  Then music came, the sure, awakening bars,  He leapt beyond the bounds of joy and grief;  His heart conferred in those transfigured hours,  Strength like the sun, precision like the stars;  The sea was his; the buoyancy of clouds,  The sap that flows in every fluted leaf,  The blossoming, in light, of fields of flowers.  Yet later, smiling in applauded grace,  The Faun, the Rose was never wholly ours,  We saw remoteness in the tilted face,  He heard alone, beyond our human ears,  Beyond applause, the Music of the Spheres. Nijinsky's ashes here in peace are laid Their perfect tribute to Perfection paid.
The slanted storm tossed at their feet  The frost-nipped autumn leaves; The park's high pines were caked with sleet,  And ice-spears armed the eaves. They strolled adown the pillared pines, To part where wet and twisted vines About the gate-posts blew and beat. She watched him riding through the rain  Along the river's misty shore, And turned with lips that laughed disdain:   &ldquo;To meet no more!&rdquo; 'Mid heavy roses weighed with dew  The chirping crickets hid; I' the honeysuckle avenue  Sang the green katydid. Soft southern stars smiled through the pines. Through stately windows, draped with vines, The drifting moonlight's silver blew. She stared upon a face, now dead,  A soldier calm that wore; Despair sobbed on the lips that said,   &ldquo;To meet no more.&rdquo;
Diving nude into the pond they made  the woman first, then the man. Their dog barks. I am the friend, I've come up the long driveway with my bottles of wine, good bread, my persistent need for their table. My friends swim slowly back and forth across the pond across the diminishing shafts of light lingering, lingering, like people at a table, unable to let go. The good black-and-white dog shakes himself dry. There is a sadness in our quiet walk to the house, in the way he reminds her of some small chore they must do after dinner. The dog finds her hand and her palm rests on his spotted head. I watch them, loving them, loving this trilogy of faithfulness renewing itself with each attention to one thing, and the next.
 All desolate she sate her down Upon the marble of the temple's stair. You would have thought her, with her eyes of brown,  Flushed cheeks and hazel hair,   A Dryad dreaming there.  A priest of Bacchus passed, nor stopped To chide her; deeming her whose chiton hid But half her bosom, and whose girdle dropped   Some grief-drowned Bassarid,   The god of wine had chid.  With wreaths of woodland cyclamen For Dian's shrine, a shepherdess drew near, All her young thoughts on vestal beauty, when   She dare not look for fear    Behold the goddess here! Fierce lights on shields of bossy brass And helms of bronze, next from the hills deploy Tall youths of Argos. And she sees   Flushed with heroic joy,   On towards the siege of Troy.
To lift himself from one of his depressions, my father took up painting, oil on canvas for which he had no teacher, just an apprenticeship in sheer will and bagfuls of groceries to practice on. I can still smell those apples, and sometimes peaches, going slyly to rot on my mother's velvet shawl whose blue folds he slowly re-created one by one by one as if they were waves on an artificial ocean. Courbet's fruit have so much roundness, such warmth and homeliness beside the pewter tankard, you could almost say they had humanity, if apples could be human. And as I stand in this crowded museum, all these years after my father's death, they make me grieve for him and his precise, mistaken apples, not for his failures; for how stubbornly he tried.
Paul Laurence Dunbar Chambers  what a long history of perfection, bass man, those swollen solos on Miles's Standard teachings &ldquo;Blues&rdquo; dum, dum, dum, dum, dum. If Mingus is monster star, you are his private brother, so soft baby, so beauteous in your shuffling, how many soundful dysplexia did you do it over and over and over do it to everybody's gutstrings listening as flat out, Jim, as harpheart and bone  What a long history Paul Laurence Dunbar Chambers, and your namesakes, in the chambers.
Here, wheels are stilled, and boxed fear can be set free. I unclothe, lie on a white board. Paper fish float above me, and the sea seems to unwind as she stirs essences of lavender, clary sage, rose. When she smoothes the blanket, cups my head, I remember the barbed wire enmeshed in the wool of my mother's warmth, learn to take in this kindness. Kneading shoulders, she unravels knots, and tears rise from depths I can't name. I let her take my elbow's weight, web her fingers with mine, ease each joint, and I think of a girl who sat by me once, the stab of her questions, my sadness when I saw she was too brittle for anyone to touch. A circle buds in the small of my back. It opens upwards, carries the scent of summer pinks. Lulled from side to side, words come but no need now to speak. Movement diminishes to a single dot and I slip into sleep, press my palm to a face I love. My whole length is held by friends, their limbs woven into branches. I surface to the sea-quiet of her voice, put on shoes, outer self, go softly through the pounding street.
swim so now million many worlds in each least less than particle of perfect dark  how should a loudness called mankind unteach whole infinite the who of life's life(hark what silence),&rdquo;&ldquo;Worlds? o no:i'm certain they're (look again)flowers.&rdquo;&ldquo;Don't worlds open and worlds close?&rdquo;&ldquo;Worlds do,but differently;or as if worlds wanted us to understand they'd never close(and open)if that fool called everyone(or you or i)were wise.&rdquo; &ldquo;You mean worlds may have better luck,some day?&rdquo; &ldquo;Or worse!poor worlds;i mean they're possible  but&rdquo; lifting &ldquo;flowers&rdquo; more all stars than eyes &ldquo;only are quite what worlds merely might be
How pure the hearts of lovers as they walk Through the rich quiet fields Where the stiff wheat grows heavy on the stalk, And over barley and its paler golds The air is bright  Would touch it all, embrace, learn it by hand, Plunging their faces into the thick grain, To stroke as well as see the cow's soft flank, To feel the beech trunk harsh under the palm, And oh, to drink the light! They do not even walk yet hand in hand, But every sense is pricked alive so sharp That life breathes through them from the burning land, And they could use the wind itself for harp, And pluck the vibrant green. At first the whole world opens into sense: They learn their love by looking at the wheat, And there let fall all that was shy and tense To walk the season slowly on propitious feet And be all they have seen. While all around them earth moves toward an end, The gold turning to bronze, the barley tasseled, Where the great sheaves will be stored up and bend Their heads together in that rich wedding bed All are about to enter. The hearts of lovers as they walk, how pure; How cool the wind upon the open palm As they move on toward harvest, and so sure Even this ripening has a marvelous calm And a still center.
friday in berkeley. the crippled ship has just returned frm behind the moon. fools wave flags on destroyers in the pacific i am worried abt this dog lying in the street. he wants to get some sun. the old man across the street trims his rosebush while just 4 blocks away there is a war. people are being arraigned fingerprinted hauled away to st rita made to lie on the floor the newspapers will lie abt all this. abt these 12 year olds throwing stones at the cops, they wanted to get at some sun no matter what heavy traffic was coming down on them
After some years of my clearest testimony I, for one, remain convinced that in the readily-available-to the-tactile senses (barn reek, green moss in blue river ice, owls like nuns after the copulating cats, etc.) what speaks plainest is the most mysterious. My friends in Moss Bones's beer hall (that being his honest-to-God name) used to go home with me and I would drag my feet in the black locust groves where we had all grown up pricked and bleeding. My idea was the wind sang the truth there, fretting the thorns like a fiddler. If children threw stones at us I said let them go. One drowned running away. This year I consumed only cabbage and spring water. The priest stepped from behind a hedgerow in December, stinking and thundering that he was reality ( <> saw beyond his foolishness. I heard owls blaspheming the language of stones. One day coming home, I said there is nothing else to do, I will have to get down among the huddled things and make a noise to get their attention. I saw also the only woman I have ever loved crossing the ridge, visible and silent as a stump. Then I began to dig and I could hear dear dead mother padding down the hall, the fat nun knocking the river riding the bones of that child.
prosper O cell <> <> bells' twentyoneguns <> full sail the  sifting out a glory loosed lightning to answer arching on A FIREWORKS MUSIC:   hexagonal prisms terminated by hexagonal pyramids   quartzrose oscillations of velocities (link on washing tone) of the coming of the eyes, across the sea, swift sounded hundred circling beauty trampling out the heart, Lord <> see how he walks upon the wheat! :the mind become its own subject matter: bent ambient (all meaning is an angle) sampling the optimum play at any one moment spray of curvature falling off toward the edge great gold sunflowerhead of photons sum of sun and moon in array the flicker of diamond-lattice pattern against a complex dappled back- ground also moving. Ratio is all.
To be defrauded often of large sums, A whole year's income, even, By friends trusted so long and perfectly He never thought to ask receipts from them: Such had been his misfortune. He did not undervalue money, sighed for Those banknotes, warm in the breast pocket, For want of which his plans were baulked; But could not claim that any man had left him In complete poverty. Easier to choke back resentment, Never to sue them, never pit in court His unsupported oath against theirs; Easier not to change a forsworn friend For a sworn enemy. Easier, too, to scoff at legal safeguards, Promissories on pale-blue foolscap Sealed, signed, delivered before witnesses. What legal safeguard had a full wallet Carried among a crowd? But though he preened himself on calmly Cancelling irrecoverable debts, It vexed him not to know Why all his oldest, dearest friends conspired To pluck him like a fowl.
&lsquo;Hard liquor&rsquo;, joints, and more than faded jeans: The gestures of your otherness only show You know this region better than you know; Not what a landscape is but what it means. You get it right: thus, &lsquo;unprepared and rested Is better than unrested and prepared.&rsquo; Our friends were only ever those who dared To put their friendship where it would be tested. You give a steady trust, not easily But where it most is needed or is earned. You know how much of it will be returned, More valuable than either dope or whisky Or things that pass for love. And so, departing, Seek out some limestone landscape after all, Where people are themselves, and there recall Mid-Anglia at this midwinter spring.
The time you won your town the race We chaired you through the market-place; Man and boy stood cheering by, And home we brought you shoulder-high. To-day, the road all runners come, Shoulder-high we bring you home, And set you at your threshold down, Townsman of a stiller town. Smart lad, to slip betimes away From fields where glory does not stay And early though the laurel grows It withers quicker than the rose. Eyes the shady night has shut Cannot see the record cut, And silence sounds no worse than cheers After earth has stopped the ears: Now you will not swell the rout Of lads that wore their honours out, Runners whom renown outran And the name died before the man. So set, before its echoes fade, The fleet foot on the sill of shade, And hold to the low lintel up The still-defended challenge-cup. And round that early-laurelled head Will flock to gaze the strengthless dead, And find unwithered on its curls The garland briefer than a girl's.
Down in the mud I lay, Tired out by my long day Of five damned days and nights, Five sleepless days and nights,... Dream snatched, and set me where The dungeon of Despair Looms over Desolate Sea, Frowning and threatening me With aspect high and steep  A most malignant keep. My foes that lay within Shouted and made a din, Hooted and grinned and cried: &lsquo;To-day we've killed your pride; To-day your ardour ends. We've murdered all your friends; We've undermined by stealth Your happiness and your health. We've taken away your hope; Now you may droop and mope To misery and to death.&rsquo; But with my spear of faith, Stout as an oaken rafter, With my round shield of laughter, With my sharp, tongue-like sword That speaks a bitter word, I stood beneath the wall And there defied them all. The stones they cast I caught And alchemized with thought Into such lumps of gold As dreaming misers hold. The boiling oil they threw Fell in a shower of dew, Refreshing me; the spears Flew harmless by my ears, Struck quivering in the sod; There, like the prophet's rod, Put leaves out, took firm root, And bore me instant fruit. My foes were all astounded, Dumbstricken and confounded, Gaping in a long row; They dared not thrust nor throw. Thus, then, I climbed a steep Buttress and won the keep, And laughed and proudly blew My horn,  <> <>
o nly this darkness(in whom always i do nothing)deepens with wind(and hark begins to Rain)a house like shape stirs through(not numerably or as lovers a chieve oneness)each othering Selves i sit (hearing the rain)un til against my (where three dreams live)fore head is stumbling someone(named Morning)
<> There's a fire in the turrets of heaven; there's a flush on the breast of the sea; And the gates of the sun-rise are filled with a flame as of myriad roses, That kindles ineffable vistas, a world re-created for me. There's a hill in its vestment of dew-fall that kneels like a priest to the altar; Low bird-cries resound in the silence, frail tendrils reach forth to the light; The fields flower-breasted are fragrant, and fresh the faint breezes that falter:  Life's faith in the future is perfect, life's dream of eternity bright! ... If ours were the faith of the petals unfolding, the nest and its treasure,  The faith all revealed and illumined, the faith that alone makes us free,  What divine understanding were ours of the sun-light that flows without measure, Of the silver of moon-light that rings down the resonant floor of the sea! ... What divine understanding for life; for the world how majestic a meaning; What truths by the way-side; in martyrdom, poverty, pain, what delight; What poems in the midnight; what visions revealed that the darkness was screening, As like fire-tinged incense the dawn-mists flush deep round the knees of the night! ... O, beware! for the safety we cherish is false: we are blind! we are soothless!  Have we learned how the fields are made fruitful? Are we aimed to life's ultimate goal?  O for faith to accept for our lives not an ecstasy less, not a truth less, Than the world and the senses afford us, than are sphered in the scope of the soul! ... <>  Round him the dark is dumb, deserted, deep;  And all the haste we make, the feast we keep,  The law we serve with cross and cord and knife, The Gods we supplicate, the tears we weep,  The crowns we win as victors in the strife,  The forms and fears with which our days are rife,  Like vague, fantastic dreams perturb his sleep ... He sleeps and dreams to-day and yesterday.   When shall he wake, and in his eyes the breath  Of day-break burn with truth's eternal beams? When shall he wake? ... We ask in wild dismay!   Haste! lest he sleep, as now he sleeps and dreams,  Dreamless to-morrow in the House of Death! ... <>  Daily within the meditative mind,  Orbits of light where thought before was blind,  And where was doubt supreme imperatives;  So, in the high adventure of our lives,  As we are real, receptive, unresigned,  Seeking the Lord, we shall not fail to find:  Till strength by strength his regency revives ... Then shall his will and work alone be done  In all we do; his voice alone resound  In all we say; and he alone confound  Imperishable when all else perisheth!   With eyes of daring and dominion,  The void, vast vision of the Sphinx of Death! ... <>  And in ourselves perfection; day by day,  Greatly adventured on the endless way,  To realize truth's inspired imaginings;  To beat up the wide skies of thought on wings  Radiant with sunrise; to depart away  Into the future with the great grave gay  Passionate heart of life that loves and sings;  This is the soul's desire! the secret aim  Of life's dim aspiration, from the sod  Thro' countless forms, thro' beast and man and God!  This is the mind's pure ecstasy; and this  Is love, which kindles to a single flame  Life's immemorial validities!
An angel with a voice like summer show'rs, Or woodbird melodies in tranquil hours, Brought me one day a wondrous, radiant rose Called in those happy isles but this: Repose. Its fragrance was the balm of early flow'rs, Fresh with the magic of the Spring's new pow'rs; Its petals quivered with a soothing trill, Like the soft murmur of a mountain rill. Its hues were exquisite as dawning skies When the first splendor greets the watcher's eyes, Or as the sea-shell seen through silver spray, Or as the last bright tint of fading day. The angel said: &ldquo;Not now may this thine be, I only came to offer it to thee; Not as a gift but as a hard-earned meed, I give it to all those who feel its need.&rdquo; One moment fast I held it, and a light Like to an aureole, gleamed golden-white O'er all around; while blended echoes clear, Stealing in unison, fell on my ear. &ldquo;How may I gain this priceless flow'r?&rdquo; I cried. The angel in a flute-like voice replied, &ldquo;Neither by works nor penance, prayer nor pain, Canst thou this rare celestial flower gain. &ldquo;But when love of mankind and duty flow In one all-perfect song, one golden glow, When purest echoes soar from purest aims, Then will I come once more to heed thy claims.&rdquo; The angel vanished on a sunlit cloud, But still his words were speaking to me loud. I bowed my head, resolved to claim the rose Called in those happy isles but this: Repose.
No it didn't get too cold here too often. Expectations flare around the morning sliding down its sluice, and are swallowed later, like an aspirin. The clouds unfurl elsewhere. The hope of an answer is held out as an answer. A helmet of haze settles, and doorways are remembered by the rain that brought us there, and released us later from its shimmering cage. Shadows have toppled across roofs and down brick in blue planks, while pigeons rise from our feet. I too glisten, and, like a tray of silverware appearing suddenly within the circle of the burglar's flashlight, I look for what I have overlooked. Was it only the seamstresses blushing in colors no one dreams of anymore? And what is there to say now, without going on like the threads of a frayed scarf?
what a long face gravity puts on things now that no one wants to play with you. We huddle in the vacant lot, over dirt etched with secret stratagems; you stand at your boundary, arms crossed, thinking  Oh, Heaven, it must be very lonely in the firmament, that rarefied vacuum to which you press your nose, impervious to the piped tunes of ice-cream trucks, all that light traversing you and not so much as one bead of sweat. Little Heaven, for every cold hymn you know, we have a naughty one; for every wafer of soap, there is a lozenge or fingercake; for every rod of disdain, a licorice whip rolled in sugar. Little Heaven, now that the grownups are asleep in the bleachers, now that the ancients are face-up in the earth, there are new pencil marks on the casements, we can reach the light switch ourselves. Little Heaven, everything has changed now that you want into us and can be refused.
Yesterday in the garden-close Budded and blossomed and blew a rose, Faded and fallen its petals gay; The rose lies dead in the garden to-day. But, sweet, I pray you do not sorrow, As fair a rose will bloom to-morrow. Yesterday, dearest, you and I, Swore that our love would never die. Our vows were frail as all vows be. To-day love's fled from you and me. But, sweet, I pray you do not sorrow, New love will come to us to-morrow. Thus the hours swiftly by us go; Well, I e'en wist it must be so. Do not weep now for what is past, Love and roses will never last. Then gaily speed past what is over, And gladly greet new rose and lover.
That public men publish falsehoods Is nothing new. That America must accept Like the historical republics corruption and empire Has been known for years. Be angry at the sun for setting If these things anger you. Watch the wheel slope and turn, They are all bound on the wheel, these people, those warriors, This republic, Europe, Asia. Observe them gesticulating, Observe them going down. The gang serves lies, the passionate Man plays his part; the cold passion for truth Hunts in no pack. You are not Catullus, you know, To lampoon these crude sketches of Caesar. You are far From Dante's feet, but even farther from his dirty Political hatreds. Let boys want pleasure, and men Struggle for power, and women perhaps for fame, And the servile to serve a Leader and the dupes to be duped. Yours is not theirs.
I have wandered into Chekhov by pure accident, mistaking the strokes of my own heart for the sound of an axe against a tree far away in the orchard. But they have let me in. The old family retainer serves me, saying: before the calamity the same thing happened, the owl screeched and the samovar hummed all the time. I hear no owl. But drinking coffee, I dream calamities of my own  evenings like this, for instance, my life which has gone by as though I'd never lived. I speak at random of the season to a man in a grey vest who mentions the weather. But though he is polite, it is clearly the dark-eyed girl he admires most, and indeed she is more slender than I. Meanwhile, nothing much occurs. We are waiting for something, a shot, perhaps, but here only a car misfires somewhere in the empty street, and night comes down over the sky like the fourth act curtain velvety and dark finally falling.
Believed we had risen above, buried in snow. Cold comfort what desperate solace,anagrammatic sub, anagrammatic bus, andoumboulouous B'Us. Tricks played with letters, little else ... White book, numb fingers. Could barely turn the page ... Wet book had we arrived in Ttha, stuck pages. One way or the other unread
Since you've gone I've fasted having made the soup whose recipe I sent (the mail- man came I wanted to send something) cold curry thick with oranges sweet clear onion underneath the lid. The skin of this truth's onion isn't clear. Leathery obstinate I think how boiled tongue peels simply how it is the taste buds (cellular abused by heat) that give way to a larger muscle: tongue truth the matter of taste and lack thereof the matter of desire. Hear me love. I'd do anything and have to keep this in and you too anything and have to keep from hearing. Is it complicity that breeds contempt? Hypoglycemic fasting for this sense of desperation forcing me thin as a needle without compass to let go of hope and pray for clarity of mind of sky the cold polar luminary any finally cold clear star. Solstice equinox solstice equinox nine months without desire every time a reason why (ill- ness fatigue exposure trauma of old love new love) all true enough. Enough. I am not pushing a friendship campaign like you said but love intense unlimited perverse familial unpretentious love is it possible that it is not enough? Without desire in a field of stars the cold moon rising hungry cold lip of a moon the pounding of my hungry blood the starved brain screaming  at last with clarity transparent lying in the grass palms joined at the heart in love desireless in prayer.
The houses are cut out in ones and twos Of something blacker than the night is black, Advertisements for simple happiness: Their window-squares are perfect, and we choose Those counter-panes of yellow to express Kept promises, gem&uuml;tlichkeit but back In this dank brake where leaves and branches blur And nothing helps that pure horizon-line To steady us into simplicity, Where beady eyes and meat dressed up as fur Peer out into the grip of vacancy, Our pallor and the wind are what define That salesman's pitch of gables, missing street, Those beacon-lights which pin the distance down Dissected by their little glazing-bars: A conversation-piece, exact, complete, Beneath a random scattering of stars, With no dull glow to make us dream a town Could back that cardboard propped against the dark, Where citizens of Flatland pay their rent And stare across, untroubled by our doubt At this unchancy tangle's question-mark, Where what is out tonight is always out And love is still the uncontrolled event.
The statue of a rich industrialist stands in a small plaza in the city of Bogot&aacute;. People wait in line to whisper their prayers in his bronze ear. Pigeons and the leaves shadow them. A  of the streets, is asking for coins, cigarettes, but receives instead a small blessing, a hand on the head and the sign of the cross. Rain that was falling moments ago glistens on the slick black hair of the soldier at the curb and on the barrel of his rifle. Water beads are caught in the blue wool of a woman's sweater, a woman who looks at her shoes and waits. A girl stares over the tops of the buildings and listens still to the rain moving away over tin roofs toward the mountains, a sound like the applause of a distant multitude. There must be girls all over the world listening into the distance like that. I don't know what the soldier is thinking. But I know the fatherless wild boys of the streets. And I know there must be someone who will listen without judgment to the secrets and prayers that grow in us each day. Water drips from the bronze ear as the woman takes her turn there, her hands hidden in the sleeves of her sweater. As she whispers the pigeons fly, funneling up into the air above the city of Bogot&aacute; to celebrate the end of rain, each one a word resisting everything that conspires to silence.
Drink ye a skoal for the gallows tree! Fran&ccedil;ois and Margot and thee and me, Drink we the comrades merrily That said us, &ldquo;Till then&rdquo; for the gallows tree! Fat Pierre with the hook gauche-main, Thomas Larron &ldquo;Ear-the-less,&rdquo; Tybalde and that armouress Who gave this poignard its premier stain Pinning the Guise that had been fain To make him a mate of thee &ldquo;Hault Noblesse&rdquo; And bade her be out with ill address As a fool that mocketh his drue's disdeign. Drink we a skoal for the gallows tree! Fran&ccedil;ois and Margot and thee and me, Drink we to Marienne Ydole, That hell brenn not her o'er cruelly. Drink we the lusty robbers twain, Black is the pitch o' their wedding dress,  Lips shrunk back for the wind's caress As lips shrink back when we feel the strain Of love that loveth in hell's disdeign And sense the teeth thru the lips that press 'Gainst our lips for the soul's distress That striveth to ours across the pain. Drink we skoal to the gallows tree! Fran&ccedil;ois and Margot and thee and me, For Jehan and Raoul de Vallerie Whose frames have the night and its winds in fee. Maturin, Guillaume, Jacques d'Allmain, Culdou lacking a coat to bless One lean moiety of his nakedness That plundered St. Hubert back o' the fane: Aie! the lean bare tree is widowed again For Michault le Borgne that would confess In &ldquo;faith and troth&rdquo; to a traitoress &ldquo;Which of his brothers had he slain?&rdquo; But drink we skoal to the gallows tree! Fran&ccedil;ois and Margot and thee and me: These that we loved shall God love less And smite alway at their faibleness? Skoal!! to the Gallows! and then pray we: God damn his hell out speedily And bring their souls to his &ldquo;Haulte Citee.&rdquo;
The drowsy day, with half-closed eyes, Dreams in this quaint forgotten street, That, like some old-world wreckage lies,  Left by the sea's receding beat,  Far from the city's restless feet. Abandoned pavements, that the trees' Huge roots have wrecked; whose flagstones feel No more the sweep of draperies; And sunken curbs, whereon no wheel Grinds, and no gallant's spur-bound heel. Old houses, walled with rotting brick, Thick-creepered, dormered, weather-vaned,  Like withered faces, sad and sick,  Stare from each side, all broken paned, With battered doors the rain has stained. And though the day be white with heat, Their ancient yards are dim and cold; Where now the toad makes its retreat, 'Mid flower-pots green-caked with mold, And naught but noisome weeds unfold. The slow gray slug and snail have trailed Their slimy silver up and down The beds where once the moss-rose veiled Rich beauty; and the mushroom brown Swells where the lily tossed its crown. The shadowy scents, that oft are wont To flit among the walks and boughs, Seem ghosts of sweethearts here who haunt And wander round each empty house, Wrapped in the fragrance of dead vows. And, haply, when the evening droops Her amber eyelids in the west, Here you may hear the swish of hoops, Or catch the glint of hat and vest, As two dim lovers past you pressed. And, instant as some star's slant flame, That scores the swarthy cheek of night, Perhaps behold Colonial dame And gentleman in stately white Go glimmering down the pale moonlight. In powder, patch, and furbelow, Cocked hat and sword; and every one,  Tory and Whig of long-ago,  As real as in the days long done, The courtly days of Washington.
<> Down the dark reverberate beaches clear and far the sea-birds call, Blue across the fire-stained waters, eastward thrusts the chuckling tide, Fresh as when the immortal impulse took the lifeless world for bride. Now the shore's thin verge of shallows keep the tense and tender light, Now the stars hang few and faultless, diademed on the brows of night, Now the moon's unstinted silver falls like dew along the sea While from far a friendly casement softly fills with light for me. So it ends! I reaped the harvest, lived the long and lavish day, Saw the earliest sunlight shiver thro' the breakers' endless play, Felt the noonday's warm abundance, shared the hours of large repose, While the stately sun descended thro' the twilight's sumptuous close. Now the night-fall Ah! I guess the immortal secret, glimpse the goal, Know the hours have scanted nothing, know each fragment hints the whole, While the Soul in power and freedom dares and wills to claim its own, Star over star, a larger, lovelier unknown heaven beyond the known!
The men keep searching the room for the culprit. I tell them electricity, those glowing coils of wire, this ironing board with the cedar frame, my coat flung over the board. I don't say I came home late, silly from a night spent in song. They ask me how  The dream told me: a scream lunged from the cliff where I slept in my skull, white winds swept the ridge of my spine, shrieked down the nerve ends. I remembered my legs: the dream roared out a tunnel, the smoke found the soft membranes, sucking into those sockets that glowed in the hallway. I think it's morning but no light shoulders its way here. The ironing board staggers, its crippled legs bucking. The coat is all gone, the green vine blackened, limp arms dangle in the window, and the dust keeps sifting through the tissues of walls, the cells shriveling. My house, my home, everything I touch turns away, and a keening rises on a wind that keeps on searching the bare coils of my brain.
Here's Mum modelling her Susan Lenglen gear with the penny-a-week insurance man looking amazed at this ripe housewife in white silk stockings leaning over the clothesline. Over the fence the neighbours' kids mime her poses. They wink and strut waving their Great Exhibition mugs. Mum was much admired by a neighbourhood that knew a bit of class when they saw it. <> It never did, but the neighbours still applauded being more than faithful to those of their own who always made the most of their lot. Here's Dad in Africa living it up with a dead pig under his foot. He's got a big cigar and an even bigger gun. All around him there's space and hordes of black naked lasses. Just the place for a Bradford lad brought up on Wesley and smog. No wonder he's enjoying himself, killing and screwing and making a profit. When this was taken he was nearly forty. Another few months and they shipped him home to work on the ledgers. He packed life up but took another twenty years to drop off. I'm looking at an Empire in its heyday. Even the dead pig is laughing.
Every night. Every. She heard them first when she was watching the tops of her white thighs. Every night they spoke again. Near her room others hear them too. Bakers turn away from their cool ovens. It is dark inside jetplanes grounded on broken runways. Nothing goes. All the workers have gone to their houses as arranged. She is alone except for the neighing horses. They come from the stable on the cobbled mews halfway between her street &amp; mine. They come from the old churchyard where they graze. They come from the cellars of brick houses where silent children won't eat their supper. They come from under the streets where their hooves clatter on the wet rock of old sewers. They come from something she holds in her hands. They come from the sea.
time turns like tables the indifferent and blissful Spring saves all souls and seeds and slaves asleep dark Spring in the dark whispering human will words spoken by two kissing tongues hissing union Eve's snake stars come on two naked bodies tumble through bodiless Christmas trees blazing like bees and rosebuds fire turns to falling powder lips relax and smile and sleep fire sweeps the hearth of the blood on far off red double stars they probate their own tied wills
clay Ganesha pushed into the sea (after a single year as worshipped God floated out and sunk in the Indian Ocean, from Bombay target area as St Sebastian body as shot full of holes for a purpose the God punished each year done away with knocked off the Solar King the Excess  transformed.  energy anyway in a society like America energy if it is not moral is only material. Which cannot be destroyed is never destroyed is only left all over the place.  Gloucester is sea-shore where Ganesh may be dropped rubbish into the Harbor cleared away yearly, to revive the Abstract to make it possible for form to be sought again. Each year form has expressed itself. Each year it too must be re-sought. There are 70 odd &ldquo;forms&rdquo;, there are 70 chances at revealing the Real. The Real renews itself each year, the Real is solar, life is not, life is 13 months long each year. Minus one day (the day the sun turns) The Sun is in pursuit of itself. A year is the possibility, the Real goes on forever
crossing furrows from green hedge to hedge, rather a crawling out of one's deep hole in midfield, in the moist gray that is dawn, and begins to hurt the eyes; to sit on one's haunches gazing, listening, picking up the voices of wheat, trail of other animals telling the nose the night's news. To be at the hollow center of a field at dawn; the radius radiant. Silver to gold, shadows violet dancers. By noon the builders scream in, the horizon blocks afternoon, a jagged restlessness. To be an animal dodging pursuers it smells but can't see clear, through labyrinths of new walls. To be mangled or grow wise in escape. To bite, and destroy the net. To make it maybe into the last of day, and witness crimson wings cutting down after the sun gone down in wrath. To stay perhaps, one throat far-off pulsing to venture one note from its feathers, one bell, on into dewfall, into peculiar silence. The multitude gone, labyrinths crumbling. To go down back into the known hole.
<> Of splendid ships that come to port no more, What dreams of moonlit seas and lovely stars, What sound of waters on a wooden floor. Something remembered from an ancient day Comes back to haunt them when the evening falls, The cry of gleaming birds from far away, The moan of winds around their whitened walls. Something survives to make them wistful still Of silver harbors that they knew of yore, Of midnight quiet by a secret hill, Of shining lights upon a singing shore. Perchance, a ghostly gull against the sky Or a white sail at twilight flashing by.
Mud put upon mud, lifted to make room, house a cave, and colder night. To sleep in, live in, to come in from heat, all form derived from kind, built with that in mind.
The crazy talkers in my head Steal lights and moments when they can; Beat at the windows to be fed Or listen to the sounds of rain. They stroll, they shout at passing Man, And in extremes they form a plan To drown at night, or catch a train. Simple as glass, they wander through The colours of my twenty years Singing and whispering the true And false of all my private cares; Inflated songs that shrink to fears. My chest is thick, so no one hears The lovely mute who kicks and tears ...
Just as the lesser gods, local, imbalanced into activity, loosened from wholeness into the efficacy of partiality and preferment, just as the lesser gods, deriving their powers from a stiller, higher source, may suggest clearer networks we can appeal our wishes to, so we ourselves find helpful confinement in smallish dispositions, pushing severe thought aside at times to fix dinner or giving up the sweets of trance a minute to help guests shuffle off big coats and snow boots: divinity's loftier stations can worsen one, apprehensions that take hold so, shuddering and shivering at being stilled, break out in their midsts: sitting still in contact with the central formless seems worthiest as some, perhaps imagined, alternative to the roil of time, frittering and fracturing us sharp across surf-surfaces: whereas being still inside, having found a token or tidbit of safety (where, though, and how are such trifles when they are needed found  in forced alternatives?) enables us to grab the sailmast and skim storm waves nearly at the wind's force, supreme pleasure in the speediest plunge and flare: lessened down far to the trivial, energyless, casual; empty stances, paradisal with indolence, sweeten to a sweetness savorless on high.
I ask, and she shakes her head, murmuring sweetly, &ldquo;I have everything I want.&rdquo; Nuzzling me, &ldquo;I have you.&rdquo; Pretending as I do to sleep, she does not notice that I see her when she floats up after midnight and drifts to the island causeway. She crosses over to the other side: the other side where there is a discharge from the penis for a few days every month; it discommodes certain men, most simply don a waterproof jock strap and go about their usual business. The discharge is odorless, but there is a fantasy among the women that it has a peculiar odor and some of them prefer not to suck their men during that period. Consequently, these men become cranky, swollen with ill humor, and so the story goes round that the men during their time are moody, changeable, unreliable; one should not conduct important or money matters when they are in their discharge.
Our tickets won't be honored on this line? But we've paid full fares  Look, we've brought our lunches, packed in paper bags  And who are these who take our places singing, in the long steel cone? At the countdown we stand numbed as castaways On Turtle Rock who watch their frigate's sails shrink to specks, then nothing where the sea becomes the infinite unfeatured blue.
<>  Who domes the caves of sullen fog with pearl,  While round and still the sick white eddies swirl  Between the smothered vistas one by one; Like ghosts the frail hysteric breezes run  Aslant the ashen world, and strive to furl  The slow drenched air in one enormous whirl  And free the ocean's breast it weighs upon. The world is dying for a draught of air,  Great autumn air that like a hoarded stream  Floods the gigantic openness of dawn; And, like the whispering of hopeless prayer,  The white world's voices, as if drowsed with dream,  Sigh through the muffled stillness and are gone.
Lust hearts stalk nights dreaming heroes of them selves, lust hearts, screaming soul, soul, soul, soul, without the least memory of what a soul is like, they stalk nights dreaming reality is their dying flesh, predicting the deaths of everyone but themselves, who are already, dead, and fixed to their deadness even in warm spring wind. Do not cross lust hearts, they mean to be killers, and it is no matter that you be black or sterilely pale, they will kill you if you cross them, if you dare to speak of a breathing world, they will menace you if you are stronger than they are, they will try to bring you down, beware the lust hearts, you see them slinking through the world certain of their beauty, but look at them, and make them look at themselves, it is a horrible experience.
I want to ride once more on the Paris M&eacute;tro Madeleine Vend&ocirc;me Palais Royal I used to know by heart the names of the M&eacute;tro sta- tions between where I lived and where you lived and I still smell the sweet odor of the cars (they used to spray them every night to freshen them up) it was a smell of death you died of cancer at twenty I did- n't learn of it till much later I was working out in India Saint Germain Sainte Chapelle Palais de Justice I called on your family and heard the sad story while your mother and fa- ther wept Ch&acirc;telet H&ocirc;tel de Ville Bastille Jean- ine Jeanine adorable Jean- ine I want to ride again in the M&eacute;tro I think I'll find you there waiting to laugh and sit beside me and hold my hand.
&ldquo;When you come Every evening, Carrying heavy trays, Kneeling to serve us, You of the lovely middle-aged face And sad eyes, Who pour the  And never raise your lids, Your dignity humbles. Who are you? What is your name?&rdquo; Kyoko translated for me. But would the hermetic person Accept the gift? &ldquo;My name is Eiko,&rdquo; she said, And vanished, Leaving us abashed, Lacking a smile. A week later, After her day off, She brought me a long box, And in it a delicate fan. Gravely we each bowed low, Having exchanged presents, And then at last, Like the moon From behind a cloud, We saw her radiance. Now it is coming to an end, I see how I have lived, Observing, recording With a painter's impersonal eye: Plum blossom, White butterflies Against a dark pine. That feathery elegance, bamboo. That fabulous mountain, a small rock. So it has been for three weeks, Until a single tired face, The face of a servant, Broke the pane of glass Between me and all things: I am inside the landscape. For the Japanese The nape of a neck May evoke passion. A tired face Grounded my lightning. The poems begin here.
It is black so. There is that dust. My ladder in light. What are my men. One is foot down. That is pack drill. Black what is vizor. A hiss I heard. The talks go up. Clump now but float. Is a jump near. A camera paced out. I phase another man. Another man is second. Second last feet on. The dust I think. So some soles cross. Is a flag near. No move yon flag. Which voice comes down. White house thanks all. Command module man not. Is kangaroo hop around. I think moon dance. Or white bird is. Good oxygen I heard. Earth monitors must be. Is it too pressing. Trained man is gay. Fail safe is gay. The black I see. What instruments are lonely. Sharp is a shadow. A horizon goes flat. All rock are samples. Dust taken I think. Is bright my leg. In what sun yonder. An end I think. How my men go. The talks come down. The ladder I shake. To leave that bright. Space dark I see. Is my men last. Men are that first. That moon is here. They have some dust. Is home they know. Blue earth I think. I lift I see. It is that command. My men go back. I leave that here. It is bright so.
The desert moves like a museum made out of light. Its mighty magnitude goes on and on. It blasts the sleeping woman in her bed. It Blasts the sleeping man. They are made clean. Then the wind moves off to Afghanistan. These are millennial figures. The tank sits upon the white sand. The men are away from home for the first time. Beyond them the great lonely peaks glisten. They will hear familiar songs in the night wind. Over to the east the great fires will burn And burn. Something moves restlessly along the sand. The wind picks it up and blows it away over the desert. It is gone into another dimension. It is like a memory or an artifact in a museum. The desert washes everything clean. A bright dog runs from Kabul to Albuquerque.
  Abseiling down  A rope that stretches from an Alpine height For miles through rising temperatures to the small town Tucked neatly in one corner of the valley floor  At such a speed, I have about    Five seconds left before     I brace and light;   While you're banking  With two advisers and the Premier Above the city in the government jet, outflanking Them with four minutes to go before you land  And they stride out to face the press    And make, as you have planned,     The country tremor;   While I'm going faster  Down a graph-curve about the anti-beef craze And its effects on GNP (a clear disaster) ... Time equals T and three more units to the Crash  You were at pains to show the Premier     One of the sheets you stash     Back in your briefcase;   And as events  Go swirling wildly out of order, you Drive from the airport in your dusk-pink Italian Ventos (Roadholding good on corniche and in wet conditions)  For two hours to the valley town    I'll land in in two seconds     Just as you come to   A braking halt,  With still time on the way to engineer A last minute affair that is nobody's fault. Now everything's happening so fast, the way we glance  And swerve by mountains, phalloi, parents,    The intervening distance     Approaching zer-   Stopped dead,  Come skidding out of pastiche, out of text, Into another that has us side by side in bed With seven bells, we bathe here in a giga-watt  Of sunlight, dazed and twined together    And not sure as to what     Will happen next.
Now the earth seems profound and inangular: the shapes rise muted and interdependent: a tree's limbs drool on the frame of a Volkswagen: a nest swims frozen, well placed in a river's midst. All the world is new shrapnel. Winter seems to bind us in our ways: suspended in whatever state of elegance or denial, we are what we are: an acceptance. And the most beautiful is just that: a face which at last might be seen. It is a time of chorus, of witness: the few living things, bedraggled, light-sparse wander in a world held back, inexpressible: the few living things (memory-kept) seem to falter, inbreak, though they shall not go under.
They followed the tobacco crops in the spring, the cotton crops in the fall, all along the flat plains. It had to be the right time, the right town, where for the blues, people had enough money to spend. Call it a blues trail. A trail that led to a big tent. Town after town, people packed in like rice in a bowl. On she would come, the Empress, the Voodoo Queen. Blast the blues into them so people remembered who they'd been. Took them to the sad place. The place they were scared to go. Took them to the mean place where they knew they'd been low. Somebody was waiting. And it might have felt like home. Somebody knew them; somebody could see right into their soul. And she took them in feathers and plumes, she took them there in extraordinary costumes; a wig of horsehair and a lampshade fringe. Her blues were like secrets, or shocking bits of news. Travelling on the underground railroad, out of the tent, a voice faster than the wind. Where to meet. Which house was safe. Which church. Carrying the blues from Chattanooga to Chicago. The tobacco crops in the spring; cotton in the fall.
You who are about to be overlooked in the heat of, the joy of the argument the intangible I cheat you out of innocently and with regret for such is the spirit of the law. The mystery of all that is familiar: the living maze of the moving fingers which determines once and for all the fall of the dice. Endless nostalgia for the concrete something we could sink our teeth in the accompanying story of its remarkable properties to amuse, to astonish to ease our suffering. To you who remain a probability strict condition of the invisible variable of the imminent I make these offerings. Because the light is always with us and the hush of an early morning time propitious to plain speech space between the premonition and the event the small lovely realm of the possible.
Only paper and wood are safe from a menstruating woman's touch. So they built this room for us, next to the cowshed. Here, we're permitted to write letters, to read, and it gives a chance for our kitchen-scarred fingers to heal. Tonight, I can't leave the stars alone. And when I can't sleep, I pace in this small room, I pace from my narrow rope-bed to the bookshelf filled with dusty newspapers held down with glossy brown cowries and a conch. When I can't sleep, I hold the conch shell to my ear just to hear my blood rushing, a song throbbing, a slow drumming within my head, my hips. This aching is my blood flowing against, rushing against something  knotted clumps of my blood, so I remember fistfuls of torn seaweed  rising with the foam, rising. Then falling, falling up on the sand strewn over newly laid turtle eggs.
It is what we both knew in the sunlight of a restaurant's garden As we drank too much and touched While waiting for the lemon wedges and rainbow trout. If it's about that door? I'm not sorry. You smiled through tears. The night clerk said that I was Crazy like a bear. Laughing, you spilled your beer. Over the hedge a farmer paints a horse's cankers With a heavy tincture of violet ... Later, in a dark room, both of us speckled, middle-aged, and soft. I dragged my mouth like a snail's foot up your leg and body To your mouth. We both shivered. You ran naked before a window. Shyness increases your importance! I don't know what you think when we are no one for a moment: Hay-ropes, hands at ankles, gone beyond Even the dripping faucet and its sink spilling onto the floor... There's no strongbox hidden in the closet. It's often like laughter, &ldquo;You go pee for me and I'll boil the water.&rdquo; Sipping hot coffee, you told me a story about the old ringmaster On the Baltic shore: he's inside his little house on wheels, and The goldfinch jumps from its silver platform to the cage's floor that's Littered with straw and shredded handbills. The ringmasterday dreams About ponies circling in a white path of ashes ... On the table before him there's an ounce of tobacco And in his plate: blue and gray parsnips, beef and the open letter That he knows better than the loose floorboard! The two of us Enjoy our solitude: folded over chairs are the clothes We never wore. If you die first, I'll sway in the hallway like a bear. I'll whisper, &ldquo;I'm sorry.&rdquo; And you'll Not unlock the door. I'll break through with my hip and shoulder ... Remember? You were glad that I did it once before!
The little girl won't eat her sandwich; she lifts the bun and looks in, but the grey beef coated with relish is always there. Her mother says, &ldquo;Do it for mother.&rdquo; Milk and relish and a hard bun that comes off like a hat a kid's life is a cinch. And a mother's life? &ldquo;What can you do with a man like that?&rdquo; she asks the sleeping cook and then the old Negro who won't sit. &ldquo;He's been out all night trying to get it. I hope he gets it. What did he ever do but get it?&rdquo; The Negro doesn't look, though he looks like he's been out all night trying. Everyone's been out all night trying. Why else would we be drinking beer at attention? If she were younger, or if I were Prince Valiant, I would say that fate brought me here to quiet the crying, to sweeten the sandwich of the child, to waken the cook, to stop the Negro from bearing witness to the world. The dawn still hasn't come, and now we hear the 8 o'clock whistles blasting from heaven, and with no morning the day is sold.
Even on the quietest days the distant growl of cars remains persistent, reaching us in this airy box we share with the fieldmouse and the fox; but she drifts in maternity blouses among crack-paned greenhouses  a smiling Muse come back to life, part child, part mother, and part wife. Even on the calmest nights the fitful prowl of planes is seldom still where Gatwick tilts to guide them home from Tokyo, New York or Rome; yet even today the earth disposes bluebells, roses and primroses, the dawn throat-whistle of a thrush deep in the dripping lilac bush.
my love thy hair is one kingdom the king whereof is darkness thy forehead is a flight of flowers thy head is a quick forest filled with sleeping birds  thy breasts are swarms of white bees upon the bough of thy body thy body to me is April in whose armpits is the approach of spring thy thighs are white horses yoked to a chariot of kings they are the striking of a good minstrel between them is always a pleasant song my love thy head is a casket of the cool jewel of thy mind the hair of thy head is one warrior  innocent of defeat thy hair upon thy shoulders is an army with victory and with trumpets thy legs are the trees of dreaming whose fruit is the very eatage of forgetfulness thy lips are satraps in scarlet in whose kiss is the combining of kings thy wrists are holy which are the keepers of the keys of thy blood thy feet upon thy ankles are flowers in vases of silver in thy beauty is the dilemma of flutes thy eyes are the betrayal of bells comprehended through incense
I had some cards printed The other day. They cost me more Than I wanted to pay. I told the man I wasn't no mint, But I hankered to see My name in print. MADAM JOHNSON, ALBERTA K. He said, Your name looks good Madam'd that way. Shall I use Old English Or a Roman letter? I said, Use American. American's better. There's nothing foreign To my pedigree: Alberta K. Johnson  <>
Soundless waterfall, cave-in, and from emptiness the infused nova as sense burns more flatly, and window gives onto window in receding series  even in the center, extinguishings whose turbulence, carried, is a working also. But Andersen's father, permeable to each wind and fleeing that sorrow in his father before him carried his boy at the first sign afflicted out to the dispossessing spring to leave him through the night on Saint John's Eve, a cold year. Cinched into leggings and mittens with hemp drawstrings and canvas from a wrecked fishing smack, he was set down in the strict, abused place. There was, in their case, extenuation, huddled towards a cure before drenched April, consigned neither honeysuckle nor lily, with belief even before hope, before cloud had towered and dissolved through June of the ruins. Tempest came with breastplate clangwheeling through his chilled dream of armor, and the mad girl scrumpled unseen near his feet broke away in a cascade of labials, leaving him sprocketed to after-flashes, unable to lay hands on a shield, leaving him through years growing tenuously glad for other lightnings, those that retain passage. As if yanked upright he tore from that ground oddly surefooted, agile through pitch downpour, on his back the fame and fate of shattered armor for his countless sons.
Gone silence down lowered sun O at this each Of everything here These poor knotted hands lost Under the darkened foam Of grass. Stone Unto stone and flesh unto flesh Scattered as cold petals On the floor of winter's Own walking. All should Be dark. And dark on dark forever Now. Sundown and world, too. As it is for them, Lying here. Why is it not? Why is it not
He played a paralyzed man once, before I knew him. He made his body settle into a position of broken readiness, hunched on the rotting pins of his bones. I thought I'd seen it before: actors in wheelchairs as actors in wheelchairs. But he gave that damage power, a sound in the throat that rattled the cast around him. Too real, I suppose, for film, with its images fast as litter in a ditch but for me, who'd been waking night after night in a sweat of disbelief, my whole life a Platonist double-take, sparkless as the severed nerves of the spine, it made sense.  my moving hands on the bedclothes, the good blood in my extremities, some unwanted lover's love, gathered up as he slept, into the repeating mechanism. But that first morning, when we'd found our way to each other, he'd already survived my imagination and before dawn, I made my pact with illusion. He was out on the balcony and I thought I heard singing. When I went out there he stood looking over Assisi, not a single sound but the new sun, a day, blue and windless, coffee and a little bread on a tray.
When all the plays you had ever seen saw you go reading through their rooms and gardens, no one overtly commented on it, only the few you'd played, whose lines you'd learned or were working on, dried on some orange-highlighted riposte. The virtuous non-speaking wished you well the way they do, unceasingly, while the host went smirking to the wings of his white hell to hiss and come back charming.     But to what? The lines were striking but the room was still, light draining through some fissure in the plot, and none came to the reading of the will, or really loved, or looked to hear the shot, but sat there satisfied or, even worse, went smiling to the lip of the lit stage and on, oblivious, starting to disperse among ourselve,s unpeeling from each page as all of us do always, leaving, One: some barmy and inexplicable carry-on directed shirlly from true darkness. Two: you, or this local amateur cast as you.
Rimbaud did it, gave it up, like cigarettes, and went on with the rest of his life. I'll write a novel. I'll make a movie. I'll sing in a rock-and-roll band. I'll make end tables in my basement and late at night my wife will call down that she is going to bed. I will follow in an hour or so and watch her sleep, me sitting on the edge of the bed on the edge of sleep, still excluded from her dreams as from my own. I'll have heart attacks. I'll have gray hair. I'll have a son in my dotage. We'll blow bubbles in the bathtub, glistening spheres rising. We'll play with his boats and washrags. Then I'll clean his secret parts. A daughter would do, but a boy like his father adds symmetry: while he fumbles with toothbrush I'll dry his legs, his feet which turn inward from the closeness of the womb, of the wounds of Oedipus. Otherwise we shall be together perfectly fragile.
At twilight I went into the street. The sun hung low in the iron sky, ringed with cold plumage. If I could write to you about this emptiness  Along the curb, groups of children were playing in the dry leaves. Long ago, at this hour, my mother stood at the lawn's edge, holding my little sister. Everyone was gone; I was playing in the dark street with my other sister, whom death had made so lonely. Night after night we watched the screened porch filling with a gold, magnetic light. Why was she never called? Often I would let my own name glide past me though I craved its protection. A small child is ill, has wakened. It is winter, past midnight in Antwerp. Above a wooden chest, the stars shine. And the child relaxes in her mother's arms. The mother does not sleep; she stares fixedly into the bright museum. By spring the child will die. Then it is wrong, wrong to hold her  Let her be alone, without memory, as the others wake terrified, scraping the dark paint from their faces. Far away my sister is moving in her crib. The dead ones are like that, always the last to quiet. Because, however long they lie in the earth, they will not learn to speak but remain uncertainly pressing against the wooden bars, so small the leaves hold them down. Now, if she had a voice, the cries of hunger would be beginning. I should go to her; perhaps if I sang very softly, her skin so white, her head covered with black feathers....
Nick Tahous is the greatest greasy spoon in western new york and I was weaned on his texas hots and hamburgers. Nick's first place was a little shop with sawdust on the floor where they spoke the first foreign language I ever heard. I suspected the sauce's secret was in greek. my father and I would seal any adventure together with a visit to Nick's. he'd cautiously admit he loved me with a ritual of hamburgers and cokes. love and grease has followed me through the years. today when I desire to show anyone I love them I cook them something and I don't spare the oil.
Ah me, my love's heart, Like some frail flower, apart, High, on the cliff's edge growing, Touched by unhindered sun to sweeter showing, Swung by each faint wind's faintest blowing, But so, on the cliff's edge growing, From man's reach aloof, apart: Ah me, my love's heart! Alack, alas, my lover, As one who would discover At world's end his path, Nor knows at all what fa&euml;ry way he hath Who turneth dreaming into faith And followeth that near path His own heart dareth to discover: Alack, alas, my lover!
<>  All night, from my pillow I heard, but to grieve me,  The plash of the willow; The rain on the towers,  The winds without number, In the gloom of the hours,  And denial of slumber: And nigh to the dawning,   My heart aching blindly, Unresting and mourning  That you were unkindly  What did I ostensibly,  Ah, what under heaven, Liege lady! but sensibly  Doze till eleven?
A letter from a flier, &lsquo;We came back up the Moselle In the twilight, and I thought Of your friend Ausonius....&rsquo; Bright midnight, the Easter moon Shepherds a sky of fleeces. Reading, drinking Chateau Ausone, I puzzle out those fluent pictures, The footprints of Tu Fu grown old, Hungry, lost on the Great West Road, Dead, hostage of streams and rivers. On the radio a piece For the morticians, the Faur&eacute; Requiem, sentimental, Its themes remotely Japanese, When they are not Gregorian; And after it, a newscast, The same story, fugitive, Durable, as a torch of grass. Paulinus and Bodhidharma, The intact soul vanishes In wildfire. Jungle or glacier, The filth of the world strangles One hundred million young men. One hundred million men in arms! More than lived in all Athens, From beginning to end. Tonight, The Feast of the Resurrection, Easter, in a year of war, The radio concert's choice Is appropriate enough, A sentimental Frenchman's Ideas of death and rebirth, The language of Roman ruin, Of the fall of Jerusalem, Tunes about cherry blossoms. &lsquo;Here alone in the night's heart, In the midst of ten thousand sorrows, I bribe the spring with wine.&rsquo;
Yellow clowns in an enormous pantomime, The severed leaves rush over the green baize In the sunlight, Tumble, somersault, whirl, Rush to the wings, While in a flash of crimson Some delirious columbine Pirouettes, wheels, lifts in the air, And sinks in a slow agony of delicious grace. Do you not think, Elspeth, Seeing how light it is, Crisp and curling and forever dying, That we should wear the scorn of death in our hearts, Like a black relic pressed to a nun's white bosom?
Darling, we're in China; a bus station motel. Do you feel your sweat mix with noodle-steam and diesel? What place I can't tell. Our map was nicked by a sneak-thief in the market square. Perhaps their need was desperate. We're at least aware that we're someplace in China. So let's quit this rucked grey sheet, and step into the midsummer midnight heat of a balcony that's lost its grip. As the town clock chimes out twelve, thirteen, let me whisper: deep in China means if something normal like a telephone's ring reaches us over the vile latrine, the barking mongrels, the lost sheep, the all-night mechanic's metallic beats, it is not for us. Not once in the lives of girls asleep in cauliflower trucks or their fathers', who in blue serge suits play cards by gaslight on an upturned box are our names mentioned. Now, come back indoors and take it slow. Who's to know? Who's to care if a quilt slithers from a hard bed to a dusty floor, darling, somewhere in China.
The services of a guide cannot, as a rule, be dispensed with; we alone can disentangle the winding passageways. I will admit the tours for me grow burdensome. How long must I endure their need to fill with talk the natural silence? I have heard it all before, their proposed improvements: <> <> Mere fancies. And yet beneath their words I have discerned a kind of rough-hewn fear. From drawing rooms and formal gardens they come to me, from sunlit lives they enter the chill, grand and instantaneous night.
The springtime that I breathed hesitant, a horrible snowstorm has choked her  I hate the shut-in winter! I am a man of streets where I follow what is lively stammering my wishes my tongue is nailed with strangeness &ldquo; My city is my home! shelter does not comfort me (nothing comforts me). Shivering the northeast has come around the corner &ldquo;Take it easy, buddy!&rdquo; Hungry for a young cock thwarted I write about it everything else is a lie and I will leave whatever and follow after chance, any likely stranger. So have I twenty years monomaniac withered, my face is lined today before the equinox no different tomorrow. Austere is the praise that I am able to sing in verses out of my life as burgeons the spring.
can u walk away from ugly, will u sample the visions of yr self, is ugly u? it ain't yr momma, yr woman, the brother who stepped on yr alligator shoes, yr wig wearen believen in Jesus grandmomma, or the honda ridden see-thru jump suit wearen brother. yeah, caught u upsidedown jay-walking across europe to catch badness running against yr self. didn't u know u were lost brother? confused hair with blackness thought u knew it before the knower did, didn't u know u lost brother? thought u were bad until u ran up against BAD: Du Pont, Ford, General Motorseven the latest Paris fashions: &amp; u goin ta get rich off dashikis before Sears. didn't u know u were lost brother? beat laziness back into the outside, run the mirror of ugliness into its inventors, will u sample the visions of yr self? quietlike the way u do it soft spokenquiet quietmore dangerous than danger a newquiet quietno name quiet no number quiet purequiet quietto pure to purer. a full back clean-up mana black earthmover my main man change yr name like the wind blow in any direction catch righteousness, u may have ta smile at the big preacher in town, thats alright organize in the church washroom, trick the brother into learning  be as together as a 360 computer: can u think as well as u talk, can u read as well as u drink, can u teach as well as u dress? sample the new visions of yr work brother &amp; smile we'll push Du Bois like they push the racing form. yr woman goin ta look up to u, yr children goin ta call u hero, u my main nigger the somethin like the somethin u ain't suppose
Why, now it has happened, Should the clock go on striking to the firedogs And why should the rooks be blown upon the evening Like burnt paper in a chimney? And why should the sea maintain its turbulence,  Its elegance, And draw a film of muslin down the sand With each receding wave? And why, now it has happened, Should the atlas still be full of the maps of countries We never shall see again? And why, now it has happened, And doom all night is lapping at the door, Should I remember that I ever met you  Once in another world?
My grandfather's beard Was blacker than God's Just after the tablets Were broken in half. My grandfather's eyes Were sterner than Moses' Just after the worship Of the calf. O ghost! ghost! You foresaw the days Of the fallen Law In the strange place. Where ten together Lament David, Is the glance softened? Bowed the face?
He touched my skin all afternoon as though he could feel the smallest particles which make me up. By tea time he knew each of the billions of electrons which fly through my body every second. Then I think he was searching for the particles not yet discovered but believed to exist. Then I didn't know what time it was any more and neither of us knew which was inside or outside as he reached somewhere very deep and fingered gold  charms, stranges, tops and gravitons  but not the words he wanted which only come now.
It worked on a cipher system: those being tortured and those waiting for that to happen like cattle getting their slaughter-weight. Gauleiter de Rais and the rest were just one step ahead  the ovens were smoking and cries still banged off the white-tiled walls. We sprang the locks on an underground room, and found refrigerated vats where knowledge was stored, a life of the mind on ice. Someone had placed fresh narcissi in a Lalique vase. Then, in a room beyond that room, two men, all that were left. They wore shreds of themselves; on both ankles, dark like hung meat, the broad bloodblister crescent of a bilbo. Free forever, they stood well back in the shadow of the doorway, clutching their mugs and spoons, and staring down the sunstruck village street, last, lost disciples of a cargo cult.
Moon child: March is coming, In mixed anger, To an eventual end. The trees have cracked Under the weight of ice, Blotting power lines, And we have been without light, Days, nights, together. Elms are first to bloom, Slowly, in fear of constant Virus, that, heedless, Will kill them off in ten years; This year they bloom. The spindly trees, Taking shape, resist The inlet, hornet, And salt-night air. In this ribald quiet, Revisited without shame, There is evidence, Ornate, and our hunger.
It breaks my heart That's how my aunt Or uncle would Have said it. I See her circle The burdock pile The dog snapping At her ribbons. She stumbles, cries. All is fever In the noon sun In the pitiless Growing up that Left me running In weeds toward my Father a long Time ago and he Turning as if in Ordinary petulance. Does that sacred fence Still stand? I followed Too close at heel Into the clearing Where for once Bending with hoes We were united Hill family Poorer than poor With no Kodak To record our heart- Break and the strange Fare of love and the Lack of love as we stooped For greens or to destroy Ourselves in the hills Where the weeds walled Us in till we grew tall.
Think not, nor for a moment let your mind, Wearied with thinking, doze upon the thought That the work's done and the long day behind, And beauty, since 'tis paid for, can be bought. If in the moonlight from the silent bough Suddenly with precision speak your name The nightingale, be not assured that now His wing is limed and his wild virtue tame. Beauty beyond all feathers that have flown Is free; you shall not hood her to your wrist, Nor sting her eyes, nor have her for your own In any fashion; beauty billed and kissed Is not your turtle; tread her like a dove  She loves you not; she never heard of love.
Back up in the room they snap on all-nite movies but leave the sound turned down, turned off. You see, neon &amp; smoke last just so long &amp; soon there're no more joints to haunt or get lost in, no more ghosts to give up except the flicker &amp; ripple of TV light against their shot bodies quivering with shadow. With an urgency of children permitted to stay up way past bedtime, they share, they linger, they nurse the last drink. They whisper &amp; they whisper, sighing to collapse. She peels off her turtleneck, undoes her jeans, kicks her sandals straight toward the window as the moon comes up shining thru clouds in a rainy 1930s tight-suit movie, too mellow a moon, like some yawning display in a budget-store window. For week &amp; weeks he's dragged around feeling sorry for himself but now unalone, naked next to her, he just cant remember how much or how come. Two stories down, drunks stumble the streets in search of some phone booths to pee in.
like the time I went to sleep while driving and began to dream that there was something wrong with the car the noise it made was ominous like liquid looking for a hairline crack, some brittle chink it meant to rip wide open or explode so I drove it in my dream to the mechanic's  a shoggly booth he'd roofed with zinc  where he looked it over, shook his head and told me that the problem was electric though luckily his friend across the road (and here I must have steered across the road) would fix it. But his friend said what I'd need was a real maestro in hydraulics  and one with wings at least if, hearing Greek, I hadn't slammed my foot down on the brake.
<> as of harpsichord or bare feet treading the cold deep of holly leaves. The bones fell out of the bag that was her skin. They must make a sound like a suite in a deaf composer's ear, that tumbling after the rush of sleep shattered. Who stands by the river as we stood, afraid of our bodies, you already aching for what we said before the dust? The river lapped and seemed to love all the things we could be. Years ago, then, with a stick, I gouged something green and she, crying:  I teased her whom I loved, I swore she was going to eat whatever the river allowed us and saw her eyes grow small and dart in the shallows like small fish. She gulped the river in. It blew up her breasts that were white with the first milk of her making. The flood delivered her. Below zero now, the sun dazzling snow welds each watching eye to a slit. Whose boy is this, whose somebody's heart-rattling pain goes with his stick to the waters? I follow him and do not speak for I would not want to have to take that face in my hands, wet with a green confusion. We are all hungry, my mouth said. Shyly, she seized my wrists, her mouth opened to sing in a hard air, then was gone, and all of us with sticks trying to find her.
Ambitions playing: The first, inseparable From gold-edged printing On Daedalus' table. Desire for flight; Chariot-usurping skill. The god of light Torn from the godlike will. What tears of amber, What pre-natal force From dawn's dark chamber Fired me on my course? Three harps: one From emulation drew its strength. The rising sun: A harp at arm's length. The second word of day; The second word: A harp a hand away Held by a human cord. By cypress taught and yew, My soul I made Write old ambition new And qualify the laurel's shade. I set one grave apart, Gave speech to stone: &lsquo;Come back to my sad heart And play this harp of bone.&rsquo; Little for the sun I cared, Little for renown. I saw the unknown, unshared, True grave. So I lay down; Lay down, and closed my eyes To the end of all time, The end of birth's enterprise And death's small crime. Then at once the shrouded harp Was manifest. I began To touch, though pain is sharp, The ribs of the man.
Dark of primaeval pine encircles me With distant thunder of an angry sea While wrack and resin scent alternately  The air I breathe. On slate compounded before man was made The ocean ramparts roll their light and shade Up to Bray Hill and, leaping to invade,  Fall back and seethe. A million years of unrelenting tide Have smoothed the strata of the steep cliffside: How long ago did rock with rock collide  To shape these hills? One day the mayfly's life, three weeks the cleg's, The woodworm's four-year cycle bursts its eggs, The flattened centipede lets loose its legs  And stings and kills. Hot life pulsating in this foreshore dry, Damp life upshooting from the reed-beds high, Under those barrows, dark against the sky,  The Iron Age dead  Why is it that a sunlit second sticks? What force collects all this and seeks to fix This fourth March morning nineteen sixty-six  Deep in my head?
Sighs have engendered sighs. The bones take shape. Faint grows the hammer of the striking man Swung to corruption, and the sun's escape. That sound on silence dies. Light is let loose. The dark wave mounts as when the world began, Mounts to possess the bride, and find a sluice. That tide disturbs the grains. The blinded kiss Builds in revolt a ponderous image formed From wet bonds and the lover's avarice. Force of rebellious reins Pulls nape and neck Stiff as a mast, by naked sirens stormed, Straight, where dark currents plot the leaning wreck. Rope-wrung, the fingers feel. The unshed tears Are salt in air; a storm above the mast Of unrepentant grief the dumb loin bears. Then sinks the sliding keel Through bone-ribbed sides. The quickened hope alters, that once was fast, And pulls heaven down, plunging to tread old tides.
To talk of the weather was a morbid sign. The winds blew wherever they wanted to raining their freight of dust. A week before, the sirocco had come with its tiny pouches of sand, transplanting one grain at a time the whole Sahara; silting the windows with a fine tan. But this was a wind from the north that blew across frontiers, ignoring the Customs. If it blew somewhere else the papers were glad. I brushed a spider from the web it'd spun between my arm and what seemed to be air  it fell by a thread then hobbled off, its fifth or its sixth leg giving it trouble. &lsquo;Will they survive it all&rsquo; you asked &lsquo;the insects?&rsquo; I remembered the mutation-rates we'd studied of the fruit fly (short-, long- and cross-winged) and a luminous dream I'd had of origin: life spiralling out from the cradled cell through the basking oceanic forms. And though the leaves were still I heard the wind snicking the links with its casual shears.
The clouds go and the ash trees stand Like nervous-systems in the sky, Fleshless. Alive in every bend And tilt to weather, this is psyche, Breath beneath the breathing wind. The stolid roofs look on, their attics Lungs that hold their breath for decades  Old furniture suspended in a matrix Of fifty-year old air, old blankets, Coinage from the old republics, Boardgames, clothes, and tax-receipts, The bedposts of the bed your grandparents Slept together on, its sheets. Year in, year out these wait like plants That never grow, a sky of slates, In this their garden, this the place To where each life of objects used Is drawn and eventually migrates Forever. Her pictures gather dust, Your room cleared out for space.
They talk of the triumph of the machine, but the machine will never triumph. Out of the thousands and thousands of centuries of man the unrolling of ferns, while tongues of acanthus lapping at the sun for one sad century machines have triumphed, rolled us hither and thither, hardened the earth, shaking the lark's nest till the eggs have broken. Shaken the marshes, till the geese have gone and the wild swans flown away, singing the swan-song of us. Hard, hard on the earth the machines are rolling, but through some hearts they will never roll. Ah no, in the hearts of some men there still is sanctuary where the lark nests safely. The lark nests in his heart, and through the reeds of his marshy loins swims the mallard duck at dawn, in that quick joy; deer crash their horns in the mountains of his breast, there are foxes in the cover of his beard. Ah no, the machine will never triumph; in some hearts still the sanctuaries of wild life are quite untouched. And at last all the creatures that cannot die while one heart harbours them they will hear a silence fall as the machines fail and finish; they will hear the faint rending of the asphalt roads as the hornbeam pushes up his sprouts; they will hear far, far away the last factory hooter send up the last wild cry of despair as the machine breaks finally down. And then at last all the creatures that were driven back into the uttermost corners of  the soul they will peep forth.
First on There was silence. And God said: &lsquo;Let there be clatter.&rsquo; The wind, unclenching, Runs its thumbs Along dry bristles of Yorkshire Fog. The mountain ousel Oboes its one note. After rain Water lobelia Drips like a tap On the tarn's tight surface-tension. But louder, And every second nearer, Like chain explosions From furthest nebulae Light-yearing across space: The thudding of my own blood. &lsquo;It's nobbut me,&rsquo; Says God.
Men are not seahorses. I am not a seahorse. I am many things but I am not in any way a seahorse. Please accept that I am serious. I am not in any way a seahorse. Seahorses have no meaning for me. I have never seen a seahorse and seahorses may not exist. There is to be no joke ending. This is no O. Henry seahorse denial. No twists in the tail. Surrealism also is abhorrent to me. If I continue to speak about seahorses I will cry bitterly, dabbing my eyes with a seahorse.
Although the platform seems flat it is only a disguise for a curvy being with thoughts you must conjure in your own addition to this poem. All the images can revolve on the bookstand. You dream you're the narrator in a tale where they couple in fours, and yet another flagellant offers himself for a spell of harm. Meanwhile in another paperback the heroine's manacled to the bedpost again and, of course, her long back arches up from the leopard-skin spread. Think of it, millions of us nudes, spies, leather ladies, studs and hoods stationed all along the hissing tracks of England.
The child gets up on the wrong side of the bed. There are splinters of cold light on the floor, and when she frowns the frown freezes on her face as her mother has warned her it would. When she puts her elbows roughly on the table her father says: you got up on the wrong side of the bed; and there is suddenly a cold river of spilled milk. These gestures are merely formal, small stitches in the tapestry of a childhood she will remember as nearly happy. Outside the snow begins again, ordinary weather blurring the landscape between that time and this, as she swings her cold legs over the side of the bed.
He boots a cat, ass over claws, and laughs. He lost the arm at Tobruk. His hatred of  imported from the north, is laughter too nasty over the sea. The sea has been deserted by the moon so long, tide is always out. With sea this clear, even far offshore underwater life is clearly bleak. Late in day, he sits on the wall and waits for sea to trap the sun. His memory may blur at night. His dreams are always clear violent tides and a sun locked high, two arms around a one-armed moon, praying he'll enjoy a muddy future and, deep in mud, a creature, part lady and part home. <> He laughed at my Italian. Others say he lives alone and so is what he is. Please understand. He has to kick cats and hate Counts and laugh at Italian, anyone's, really, Italian over the sea.
Let me walk through the fields of paper touching with my wand dry stems and stunted butterflies  let Sluggard Acre send up sunflowers among its weeds, ten foot high let its thistles display their Scottish magnificence, mauve tam-o'-shanters and barbed plaids  yes, set fire to frostbitten crops, drag out forgotten fruit to dance the flame-tango, the smoke-gavotte, to live after all  let the note  the white beast wiser than man raise a dust in the north woods, loping on corduroy roads to the arena.
I want to find a house I have never lived in on a beach not frequently visited. I want a wave that never crested before, I want a door entered only by people who dont understand me and I dont understand. The wallpaper should be green and the fireplace burn coal. The women on sofas cross their legs at the angle and go in summer to mountain relatives. The men have little to say. Give me a glass of water from that clean sink and one slice of tomato from the fridge and turn down the Shaker quilt. Then, then I will have lived.
Gray veils of dusk bestrewed with purple threads Hold earth, a-fevered, in their soothing power. Soft coronals of twilight round our heads, Silent we sit and dream this holy hour. Night-winds are stirring thru the stately pines, Shrouded in shadows 'gainst the star-lit sky; Night-birds are singing in the fragrant vines, Soft to their mates an eery lover's cry. 'Tis then I see thee most, and seeing love thee, Knowing the dusk but beauty's trailing gown; 'Tis then I feel and know the stars above thee, Jewels to garnish my love's golden crown. Why should I long for garish light of day, When twilight visions crowd my happy way?
The young sycamore puts out new slender stems  Among bomb-site willowherb and white-limed Masonry; her wax buds break, each long bead or pod,  Pinkish, packed with its right toad's hand of leaf, Opens in fragile emerald, but soft;  Her leaves turn, soon, solid bronze, opaque In sunshine, metallic, sharply incised,  But breathing, tender, alive and beautiful. The children have put a rope around her neck. From my upstairs schoolroom window once I watched  The child run from his empty sun-baked yard And cross the meadow, making for the dark woods.  Somewhere upon that path, that universe's Longest voyage, from heart to heart, I stand lost,  Love's road leads back, always, here, journeys back Towards this other mystery of my self,  While the child moves on beyond, exultant And incommunicable through his dark trees   Woods of untarnished images, perceptions Like thunderclaps, chimeras, symbols,  Passion, terror, ecstasy, despair, O dark impenetrable forest,  Over whose frontiers, for what strange rituals, Propitiation, sacrifice perhaps,  Unfathomable ceremonials of their guilt And innocence, do the children lead  The doomed beauty of this bursting sycamore?
And you, Copernicus, do you still search the howling tunnels of the spheres for bearings we might yet command when time's unreasoned lurch astounds us? There nothing has been known to sing unless within the heart the voice were wholly blind: The sudden arching of a nighthawk's wing negates the moon, and those stars that lurk behind the darkest reaches of each spinning head move in solitude on journeys that wind the wild, white heavens no charts designed. Naked eyes can burn through scores of suns, cause day to fly, and night to be one-sided, while within the thinnest breath of time, the pause between daylight and dusk, a galaxy is lost that's all there is, or ever was  no screaming equations, no cold decree, only the buzzing void, the longest cave: there the bat beats its paper wings, knows only the walls that close in by pulsing in mid-air. So sleep now weary poet, but look, if only one more time, outside, and find the familiar star that follows you in harmony, wherever you go, wherever you are.
BROnze fasHIONs RONZEfa shIONS BR onzeFAS hionSB RONZE FA SHI onsbr ONzeFabrASH FASHio BRonzefa shIONSB rasho FONZE R AshION ONZE mash FAbra SHION MA ROnsha FashbrON BRA shon RONZE Fashbra RASha BRonsh ASHMA frabshon BRASS on HIONBronzaFAShibro Ronzba BRASFO Nshion RASHA MO BARiosh Ronza Br ONZE Fa shio nbr onZE FAZESH ONBR ONZA Fonze FASHIONsbronze RasHMAFashio BRASH a fonz RONza BRONZAION Fash NIObr ONfaSH NOBro ShF iaBRONZE FASHIONSBRONZEFASHIONSBRONZEF ASHio nbron nbrsh BROnsh Bronsh FAS FASFASFASGASGASGAS FASFASFASFAS BRONZEFAShionshionshoniashioniasha BRON Zefa FaRonZE FAsb RONZ eashBR O N Z E
There was a book of stone no one could read. Sulky angels would not, could not turn its pages. Thunder ran along the plain; the earth cracked, not the volume. Moses, Jesus never twitched among the clouds of dead. The pen slept with the chisel, the characters filled with sand. Even the world turns over in its sleep but secret sheet clung to secret sheet. Some say the sculptor was illustriously illiterate in his trompe-l'oeil and left the book a laughing blank, unopenable, the very title undecipherable, as able as a tomb to talk of anything, of anything at all. Are we not sick of reading? Hooves and heels kick up the dunes and bury every mystery under human codex-dreaded feet.
Etching into permafrost wheels slice through the suction of a hundred mouths kneading and tearing off as spokes tie knots in the thick-lipped ruts. The clay is so jagged it blisters vision, like honey under a microscope. Heaps of random carvings and blottings. Wakes fill and wash smooth. The road quivers as a body when jarred. Now the earth itself is a lubricant, squirms and squints bubbles as a hoof sinks in and pops out like a cork, and the crater fills with old blood. Treads are written over each other and over yesterday's palimpsest of fossils. Turds of subsoil are squeezed up. Springs seep through filling each track with warped sky. Night, the road's history is set in stone. Slashed grooves, puddles stranded.
To die with a forlorn hope, but soon to be raised By hags, the spoilers of the field, to elude their claws And stand once more on a well-swept parade-ground, Scarred and bemedalled, sword upright in fist At head of a new undaunted company: Is this joy? to be doubtless alive again, And the others dead? Will your nostrils gladly savour The fragrance, always new, of a first hedge-rose? Will your ears be charmed by the thrush's melody Sung as though he had himself devised it? And is this joy: after the double suicide (Heart against heart) to be restored entire, To smooth your hair and wash away the life-blood, And presently seek a young and innocent bride, Whispering in the dark: &lsquo;for ever and ever&rsquo;?
<> Trailing sword and muffled drum  On we come, Downcast eyes and broken tread, Weary arms, and burden&egrave;d  With our dead. Lives were proffered: reck not his; For dear Freedom's ransom is  Sacrifice. Proud our love is, nor at last With a sorrow that is past  Overcast. O'er the very clay we bring, Meet it is that we should sing  Triumphing: He was foremost, he was leal; Let his gallant breast reveal  Honor's seal. Him we yield the Roman crown, Woven bays; in his renown  Lay him down. Earth will softest pillow make, So that never heart shall ache  For his sake; Spring will pass here many a day, Sighing, one with thoughts that pray  Far away, &ldquo;When the trumpets shake the sod, Raise Thy Knight from this dull clod,  Lord our God!&rdquo;
The moon, the dried weeds and the Pleiades  Seven feet tall the dark, dried weedstalks make a part of the night a red lace on the blue milky sky Write  by a small lamp the Pleiades are almost nameless and the moon is tilted and halfgone And in runningpants and  with ecstatic, &aelig;sthetic faces on the illumined signboard are leaping over printed hurdles and &ldquo;&frac14; of their energy comes from bread&rdquo; two gigantic highschool boys ten feet tall
An old man whose black face shines golden-brown as wet pebbles under the streetlamp, is walking two mongrel dogs of dis- proportionate size, in the rain, in the relaxed early-evening avenue. The small sleek one wants to stop, docile to the imploring soul of the trashbasket, but the young tall curly one wants to walk on; the glistening sidewalk entices him to arcane happenings. Increasing rain. The old bareheaded man smiles and grumbles to himself. The lights change: the avenue's endless nave echoes notes of liturgical red. He drifts between his dogs' desires. The three of them are enveloped  turning now to go crosstown in their sense of each other, of pleasure, of weather, of corners, of leisurely tensions between them and private silence.
I never told this I saw Bob Summers' body one last time when they dropped him down the chute at the crematorium. He turned over twice and seemed to hang with one hand to the railing as if he had to sit up once and scream before he reached the flames. I was half terrified and half ashamed to see him collapse like that just two minutes after we had sung for him and said our pieces. It was impossible for me to see him starting another destiny piled up like that, or see him in that furnace as one who was being consoled or purified. If only we had wrapped him in his sheet so he could be prepared; there is such horror standing before Persephone with a suit on, the name of the manufacturer in the lining, the pants too short, or too long. How hard it was for poor Bob Summers in this life, how he struggled to be another person. I hope his voice, which he lost through a stroke in 1971, was given back to him, wherever he strayed, the smell of smoke still on him, the fire lighting up his wonderful eyes again, his hands explaining, anyone, god or man, moved by his logic, spirits in particular, saved by the fire and clasping their hands around their knees, some still worm-bound, their noses eaten away, their mouths only dust, nodding and smiling in the plush darkness
's not like any other day sleep long drive sleep too cold <> get a bit of peace sleep hungry need to pee sleep, baby sleep's all over the shop sleep new nappy and babygro poppers done up to the neck sleep fat fingers starfishing damp feathers on neck curling baby lotion and talc sleep sleep in Mum and Dad's bed sleep cry in sleep and then sleep sleep sleep while the big peop le wash and dress sleep baby sleep
Thirty-five thousand faces in a field the colour of clay and flesh and blood crammed between clean white walls of a gallery. Thirty-five thousand on tip-toe craning their necks breathing like a field of corn. Thirty-five thousand voices asking why, why, why like wind in the grasses of graveyards and old battlefields. Seventy thousand ears listening to no answer. We have paid to see them. We did not expect to be stared at, or that they would move in to live with us, taking root in the field of our minds, whispering all night &lsquo;we are you, you, you.&rsquo; Thirty-five thousand figures crumbling in my head to bones and dust and ashes under a field of flowering grasses.
So many different kinds, yet only one vague word. And the Eskimos with twenty-six words for snow, such a fine alertness to what variously presses down. Yesterday I saw lovers hugging in the street, making everyone around them feel lonely, and the lovers themselves  wasn't a deferred loneliness waiting for them? There must be words for what our aged mothers, removed in those unchosen homes, keep inside, and a separate word for us who've sent them there, a word for the secret loneliness of salesmen, for how I feel touching you when I'm out of touch. The contorted, pocked, terribly ugly man shopping in the 24-hour supermarket at 3 A.M. a word for him  and something, please, for this nameless ache here in this nameless spot. If we paid half as much attention to our lives as Eskimos to snow ... Still, the little lies, the never enough. No doubt there must be Eskimos in their white sanctums, thinking just let it fall, accumulate.
is something like the rest of our doubt, whatever slow thought comes to rest, beneath the silence of starving talk. Just their fingers prints staining the cold glass, is sufficient for commerce, and a proper ruling on humanity. You know the pity of democracy, that we must sit here and listen to how he made his money. Tho the catalogue of his possible ignorance roars and extends through the room like fire. &ldquo;Love,&rdquo; becomes the pass, the word taken intimately to combat all the uses of language. So that learning itself falls into disrepute. What they have gathered into themselves in that short mean trip from mother's iron tit to those faggot handmaidens of the french whore who wades slowly in the narrows, waving her burnt out torch. There are movies, and we have opinions. There are regions of compromise so attractive, we daily long to filthy our minds with their fame. And all the songs of our handsome generation fall clanging like stones in the empty darkness of their heads. Couples, so beautiful in the newspapers, marauders of cheap sentiment. So much  so little understanding, except some up and coming queer explain cinema and politics while drowning a cigarette. They are more ignorant than the poor tho they pride themselves with that accent. And move easily in fake robes of egalitarianism. Meaning, I will fuck you even if you don't like art. And are wounded that you call their italian memories petit bourgeois. Whose death will be Malraux's? Or the names Senghor, Price, Baldwin whispered across the same dramatic pancakes, to let each eyelash flutter at the news of their horrible deaths. It is a cheap game to patronize the dead, unless their deaths be accountable to your own understanding. Which be nothing nothing if not bank statements and serene trips to our ominous country- side. Nothing, if not whining talk about handsome white men. Nothing if not false glamourous and static. Except, I admit, your lives are hideously real. The source of their art crumbles into legitimate history. The whimpering pigment of a decadent economy, slashed into life as Yeats' mad girl plummeting over the nut house wall, her broken knee caps rattling in the weather, reminding us of lands our antennae do not reach. And there are people in these savage geographies use your name in other contexts think, perhaps, the title of your latest painting another name for liar.
I have been groomed, you see. To love all spiders, except for me. To write the history of the species by starlight. I was never taught to fight. When I considered love I thought always of a Dark Spider Knight. No one else could handle my bright expectations. Alas, my life is not reparations for a race. Once, I was charmed by a silverfish. Ugly even to me, he was not my dream or my wish. The only thing that looked like love in this forsaken place. He was by no means pretty. He had a way of seeming kind and witty. It was only charm. The reach of his arm not long enough for me. Now, solitary, I consider my blight, how to fight my fate to be apart. It is simple what I want: the right to be special to especially me and someone astride a girder, winking, while he waves from afar, Or, he, erudite, and lean studying the meter of history. Or, he, flamboyant, and cool Or, languid in the workless line, threading diamonds in his spare time. Or, he, shoulders like a prizefighter circling, circling, circling in his ring. Is it wise, do you suppose, to hang in windows, waiting, when I have work to do for which I was groomed, especially? Today chores bore me. Even brilliant. I languish like any wish pressed against a windowpane.
Beneath the writing on the wall is the writing it was designed to obscure. The two together form a third kind There is no writing on the wall's other side Perhaps this lack constitutes a fourth kind Some of the writing on the wall will be designated as truth some as art It is said to represent a mirror of everyday life in its time &ldquo;Fabius Naso talks through his asshole and shits out his mouth&rdquo; for example &ldquo;Foute les Arabes&rdquo; for example Certain words and images or parts of images have been chipped away These often turn up for sale at sidewalk stalls before the walls of other cities I too have an image for sale It's the image of a poem and is to be found on the reverse of this sheet
As when the fielders put down their gloves and take up bats in their hands and pose in a row on the dugout steps, leaning forward, one foot on the field, each in his own team's uniform, each excelling at his specialty, at the bunt or long ball or hit and run or hitting where they ain't or going with the pitch, each poised within the flawless coincidence of his competence and his name  in token whereof his smile is grave, leaving us to imagine the ball stung on a line up the alley, its mountain-making arc majestic or tricky hop through a fielder crouching: so it is we cave dwellers, rousing to all that rumor in the stands, stare from our own opposing dugout, the heart's dark old colliery of awe, and see through the pure optic of fame  daylight and then that pantheon suddenly, like a burst of brilliants, scatter across the great diamond and take possession of the sunny air.
Did I imagine that romantic story?  England 1919, and the war just over, It was raining hard, and she could see A soldier, looking lost, was getting wet. Her umbrella offered decent room for two: And that was how they met. He didn't rejoin the Dublin Fusiliers, Didn't go back to Ireland, Little work there, lots more rain. Better to stay and be a British husband. Did our mother really tell us this, Or does remembrance misconstrue? She was never given to romancing; Either way it could be true.
Peret, assist me with propellors and steam radio and advertisements recommending Colman's Mustard as aphrodisiac and Bovril for clearing the mucus of the brain Wither new show business into old infamy with its clouds of purple smoke call up the whole tribe of cats inspect the stripes and claws and whiskers and sound the alarm for attack on throats stuffed with sawdust and plush lozenges and celluloid consonants and rhubarb punctuation and one hundred and seventy-nine Sumerian proverbs each blatantly untrue plus the usual lead piping rubber tubing  drain pipes filthy old tobacco pipes archaic  female contraceptive devices and the  dentures of Elizabeth, Bloody Mary, Mary Queen  of Scots, Hannah More and Anne of Cleves  (why should she be left out?)
I do not believe you You throw out words like clothes and my limbs catch them  coats for men with three arms, sweaters without armholes. I will not wear your lies. I will walk in the grace of my own perceptions, my body trained to maneuver unthinkingly in the lion's skin, my face the owl's face. My vision is the vision of the hunter, alert to the hidden fear in others. I feed on you to maintain my great strength. How can I love, I who hunger so, whose blood will not be patient for your blood? In the dark I move to tear away your soft words, your warm clothes. I move in disbelief straight to your heart.
<> By eating all I could, I'd become a pig, And I'd gobble up my food! Or, if I could get to heaven By climbing up a tree, I'd become a monkey, And I'd climb up rapidly! Or, if I could get to heaven By any other way Than the way that's told of, I'd 'a been there yesterday! But the way that we are told of Bars the monkey and the pig! And is very, very, difficult, Besides that!
What part does that old man think he is playing he is rather funny but not very his act is ridiculous and even pathetic who does he imagine he is surely he's not the boy next door the one the neighbors spoiled and the teachers thought was so promising but there is a resemblance I'm afraid it is the boy next door now the old man is stumbling and losing his lines he must either be drunk or sick will he die right on the stage he's a comedian and he wants the audience to laugh at his funeral.
The first time I looked seaward, westward it was looking back yellowly, a dulling incandescence of the eye of day. It was looking back over its raised hand. Everything was backing away. Read for a bit. It squinted between the lines. Pages were backing away. Print was busy with what print does, trees with what trees do that time of day, sun with what sun does, the sea with one voice only, its own, spoke no other language than that one. There wasn't any track from which to hang the black transparency that was travelling south-away to the cold pole. It was cloud browed over the yellow cornea which I called an eyeball for want of another notion, cloud above an ocean. It leaked. Baldachin, black umbrella, bucket with a hole, drizzled horizon, sleazy drape, it hardly mattered which, or as much what cometing bitchcraft, rocketed shitbags, charred cherubim pocked and pitted the iceface of space in time, the black traveller. Everything was backing away. The next time I looked seaward, it was looking sooted red, a bloodshot cornea browed with a shade that could be simulated if the paint were thick enough, and audible, to blow the coned noses of the young kauri, the kettle spout sweating, the hound snoring at my feet, the taste of tobacco, the tacky fingers on the pen, the paper from whose plane the last time I looked seaward would it be a mile, as the dust flies, down the dulling valley, westward? everything was backing away.
You are as faithful a widow as you were a wife, celebrating black marking each anniversary of death, marriage, and birth until the calendar blooms with occasions like a perpetual funeral wreath. Perhaps you can domesticate anything, teaching pain to heel at command, lick your face with its rough tongue, eat from your plate. Even the empty place at the table can be a simple ceremony of absence. So that afterwards when the night closes its dark petals around you the music of your voice speaking to itself becomes a duet with silence.
The heroes of childhood were simple and austere, And their pearl-handled six-guns never missed fire. They filled all their straights, were lucky at dice, In a town full of badmen they never lost face. When they looked under beds there was nobody there. We saluted the outlaw whose heart was pure When he stuck up the stage or the mail car  Big Bill Haywood or Two Gun Marx, Who stood against the bankers and all their works  They robbed the rich and gave to the poor. But we in our time are not so sure: When the posse catches us our guns hang fire, And strung up from the wagon-tongues of long reflection Our hearts are left hanging by the contradiction Which history imposes on our actions here. Perhaps we were mistaken, it has been so long, In the fierce purpose of these Dead Eye Dans? Did they too wake at night, in a high fever, And wonder when direction would he clear if ever?  For the saint is the man most likely to do wrong. In any case we later ones can only hope For the positive landmark on the distant slope. Moving through this dead world's Indian nation The heart must build its own direction  Which only in the future has a permanent shape.
| My mother wrote me my aunt's second husband, absent- minded, slow and dreamy as he looks and all, who went again with her up to Dartmouth College Chapel for the high holidays, &ldquo;is a Levy,&rdquo; so &ldquo;the Rabbi there always gives him an honor |calls him up to read frm the Pentateuch Scroll| which makes them very happy.&rdquo;|| in recomplacent people mala prop through the stratosphere the world, cloudy, blind weather to vertical heights, miles, yes air understanding passes imagination
Some seed in me, Some troublous birth, Like an awkward awakening, Stirs into life. Terrible and instinctive It touches my guts. I fear and resist it, Crouch down on my norms, a man's Patent assurances. I do not know its nature. I have no term for it. I cannot see its shape. But there, inscrutable, Just underground, Is the long-avoided latency. Like the mushrooms in the oakwood, Where the high-sloped mountain Benches the sea, When the faint rains of November Damp down the duff, Wakening their spores  Like them, Gross, thick and compelling, What I fear and desire Pokes up its head.
Her ringlets glistened like the gold of morn, And framed an oval outline statue fair, Save where a shell-blush lingered for awhile, Sending its ripples to the wavy hair. Upon her features grace had shed its charm, And in her smile sweetness to naught gave way; 'Twas like a streak of sunshine thrown across The motionless repose of early day. No sorrow rested on the calm, pure brow, But thought held undisputed empire there. Eyes like the dusky blue of evening skies, Gazed in a dream or in a quiet prayer; And through her aspect something noble shone, That proved the soul to charity had grown.
<> Beneath these elms that beat against dark skies, You trod this path another winter's night With the same thoughts as mine behind your eyes. By yonder lighted pane half glazed with sleet, A lad bends down to scan a printed line; Before my look his profile melts to meet My memory of yours. This is a shrine Forever to the studies and the sports You found and left here, to your school-boy youth, Your conquered armies and your captured forts, Your little space of wrestling with the truth. These are your footprints black upon the snow, Pointing the only way your kind may go.
I called on my friend in the evening;  I knocked at the front door. Three thuds thumped along the lobby   No sound more. No light at the front windows,  I went round to the back, Found the rear door open,  Pushed through to the black Steep-walled chasm of the kitchen-yard;  Stumbled on roots Of Virginia Creeper creeping  From up-ended chimney-pots. I groped my way to the window,  Stood stock-still While a faint wash of firelight  Oozed over the window-sill. I tapped on the glass of the window:  For answer, not a sound. But the firelight like a goldfish  Kept skittering round and round. It glittering along the shelves of books,  Titles, to me, unknown, And down on the black and dizzy wax  Circling on the gramophone. And I heard then a hushed conversation,  Fellow to fellow: Falsetto chitchat of two flutes,  The aye-aye of a cello. And I turned and blundered down the dark,  Heels scraping backyard loam  &lsquo;Mustn't interrupt,&rsquo; I said:  &lsquo;Bach's at home.&rsquo;
Getting ready for the bath I shake money from my trousers to the bedroom floor. Kate lies on the floor saying, &ldquo;No, no,&rdquo; in a voice quiet as the shut curtains. I pull back the curtains, knock the window wide. We fold up the quilt, soak the stinking quilt in the bath. Kate sleeps peacefully in our big bed. Walking over to the bed I feel two cool coins sticking to my feet
Look at us, cursed heroes of the sub-plot, twisting our faces into plaintive masks over the footlights terror, desire and glee. For we are lost, as usual at this hour, in a wood near the front of the stage  cuckolds and clowns and palace functionaries, rolling our eyes to pass the time for you with one or two approved cross purposes. See we have put on character make-up to distract you from the sound of scenery being shifted behind our backs. The principals are waiting in the wings: all too soon our leading man will make the winding sign to end our moment balanced in the light. We smudge our eye-shadow with our tears.
I knew her for a little ghost That in my garden walked; The wall is high higher than most  And the green gate was locked. And yet I did not think of that Till after she was gone  I knew her by the broad white hat, All ruffled, she had on, By the dear ruffles round her feet, By her small hands that hung In their lace mitts, austere and sweet, Her gown's white folds among. I watched to see if she would stay, What she would do and oh! She looked as if she liked the way I let my garden grow! She bent above my favourite mint With conscious garden grace, She smiled and smiled there was no hint Of sadness in her face. She held her gown on either side To let her slippers show, And up the walk she went with pride, The way great ladies go. And where the wall is built in new, And is of ivy bare, She paused then opened and passed through A gate that once was there.
It was a library copy otherwise you'd've flung it in the fire in disgust. Even cremation can't have dried the eyes that wept for weeks about my &lsquo;sordid lust&rsquo;. The undertaker would have thought me odd or I'd've put my book in your stiff hand. You'd've been embarrassed though to meet your God clutching those poems of mine that you'd like banned. I thought you could hold my  And there together in the well wrought urn, what's left of you, the poems of your child, devoured by one flame, unreconciled, like soots on washing, black on bone-ash white. Maybe you see them in a better light! But I still see you weeping, your hurt looks: <>
With Lorenzo the Magnificent dead, Michelangelo wonders what will become of the Medici. There are rumors. The body beneath his firm hands is turning into flesh. He traces the shape of a new world across her back. He rests his hands and feels her entire body breathing slowly into the pillow. What does it take? He imagines the men who preceded him. The man who taught the woman beneath his hands how to breathe like this, and the man who shaped her small breasts, and the man who brought her here. He imagines them all dead. He's seventeen, believes in eternity and thinks he knows the shape of God although at this point that shape is only a frightened Christ, crawling back from death like a crab out of the sand. The Medici are crumbling like sand. Christ did not die for them, or for this body beneath the hands that will turn stone into virgins and madonnas. Michelangelo is seventeen and believes in nothing but the voices of God at odds with one another in the heart of the marble. King Jo&atilde;o II turns Columbus down. Portugal has dreams of its own: its cartographers have burrowed their way to the Spice Islands, making the merchants of Venice feel the ache of obsolescence. Venice itself is almost irrelevant. For the record: Columbus shares favorable sailing conditions with the last Jews expelled from Spain the day before the three caravels head for the new world. If it's true that the words on top of the painting by Sebastiano del Piombo were added after the death of Columbus, and this is really the portrait of a nobleman ... If this is true, anything is true. When Juan Rodr&iacute;guez Bermejo shouts <> He's remembering an afternoon when he was seventeen and saw for the first time a woman much older and perhaps a little closer to God breathe into a pillow like God himself breathing life into a stone.
This time there was no beak, no little bloody head, no bony claw, no loose wing only a small pile of feathers without substance or center. Our cats dig through the leaves, they stare at each other in surprise, they look carefully over their shoulders, they touch the same feathers over and over. They have been totally cheated of the body. The body with its veins and its fat and its red bones has escaped them. Like weak giants they try to turn elsewhere. Like Americans on the Ganges, their long legs twisted in embarrassment, their knees scraping the stones, they begin crawling after the spirit.
Unto your mercy, Sir, we remember  the people of China and Spain: Who engage in our struggle, who make their bodies  the margin in our books where theory   is checked and proved or rejected. Greater love has no man than this  that out of his trustfulness and humility  and out of his helplessness and simplicity  and out of his blindness and stupidity   he shall give his life for what he does not know. Sir, if the struggle is inevitable  we do not ask that you should avert the struggle; Sir, if the struggle comes  we do not ask that we should be exempted from it, For we are not the sort to sit at home and hope for the best,  to shelter in the neutral hills, in the schoolroom or the   monastery; We are the sort that must have our finger in the pie,  that must follow some leader wherever he may lead; We are the sort that must be up and doing  even to our undoing. We do not speak of this as being worthy of praise,  but we know it is our nature. Sir, we do not ask for victory;  we ask that in victory you will not desert us; That the cities we shall build, our powerhouses, our factories,  our dynamos which hold in leash the lightning, Our navigation towers which look into the level thunder,  our blocks of flats for thousands upon thousands of workers, Shall not lack the Grace that once gave permanence  to a ramshackle stable at Bethlehem. Sir, we do not ask for victory:  we ask that in victory you will not desert us,   nor in defeat abandon us. For victory without you is no longer victory  nor are we defeated if you are with us in defeat.
Today if I chose I could paint a poem Or the most marvelous prose, Compose the first great American symphony, Write you a picture more ideal than moon, more real Than clothes you wear: your very skirt and shirt. Or I could dance, Twirl, swirl like Chaplin with his cane, Even refugees would laugh; Or be a tall standstill beauty, Hollywood in my glance, Bored magnificence of nose. Shop windows murmur love letters at me: I am that tinkling scarf you see, That tip-toe hat, those winking shoes, The ice-cream cone licking tower of tongue, Giddy hair-free roadster, clever electric toaster. Look up! High clouds pose in my skyey name, Henna-tinted sun all gilt glint, reaffirms my medaled rank; Air blue through, liquid as lake, ripples my telephone number. I walk in the park: Pink breasts of bud shyly offer my street address. I sip the horizon like a cocktail, Pluck clock for boutonniere, Even my mirror envies me. It is all my party, I invite you all! Will you have a tree? Pass the grass please, Make yourselves at home, Plenty of room; For I am deliciously rich, I am famous as today; I and the day together, This show-off April weather.
I couldn't do it again, I can hardly bear to look at it  in the garden, in light rain the young couple planting a row of peas, as though no one has ever done this before, the great difficulties have never as yet been faced and solved  They cannot see themselves, in fresh dirt, starting up without perspective, the hills behind them pale green, clouded with flowers  She wants to stop; he wants to get to the end, to stay with the thing  Look at her, touching his cheek to make a truce, her fingers cool with spring rain; in thin grass, bursts of purple crocus  even here, even at the beginning of love, her hand leaving his face makes an image of departure and they think they are free to overlook this sadness.
A horse could gallop over our bridge that minnows used for shade, but our dog trotting would splinter that bridge &ldquo;Look down,&rdquo; my father said, and there went Buster to break that bridge, but I called him back that day: whatever they ask me to believe, &ldquo;And furthermore,&rdquo; I say. At Niagara one night in a motel I woke, and this is what I saw  on their little pallets all our kids lay scattered over the floor, their dreams overcome by the story we live, and I awake in that spell. Since then, every night I leap through doubt, eager to find many more truths to tell. And scared as I am with my blood full of sharks, I lie in the dark and believe that whistle our dog's ears could hear but no one else heard it skewers my dream; and in crystals finer than frost I trace and accept all of the ways to know: they tell me a lie; I don't say &ldquo;But&rdquo;  there are ways for a lie to be so. You don't hear me yell to test the quiet or try to shake the wall, for I understand that the wrong sound weakens what no sound could ever save, and I am the one to live by the hum that shivers till the world can sing:  May my voice hover and wait for fate, when the right note shakes everything.
Baudelaire took the train from Paris to Rome a pink skull and blue pear balanced on the tray beside him My mother saw hideous diseases whenever I spoke something to be expunged from the filthy air he whispered pointing to his bird wing shadow I had to learn to erase the mirror when I reached for the pen ignore the ink-stained butterfly hovering above a painting of heaven a popular postcard entitled  I once sent to my sister I wanted to become a woman ashamed of her breasts their enormous size pendulous weight I listened to her undressing in the dark afraid of how she will be described I am a paper hat tumbling across a desert On a dusty windshield someone has scribbled <> <> <>
We step out on the green rectangle in moonlight; the lines glow, which for many have been the only lines of justice. We remember the thousand trajectories the air has erased of that close-contested last set  blur of volleys, soft arcs of drop shots, huge ingrown loops of lobs with topspin which went running away, crosscourts recrossing down to each sweet (and in exact proportion, bitter) in Talbert and Olds'  The breeze has carried them off but we still hear the mutters, the doublefaulter's groans, cries of &ldquo;Deuce!&rdquo; or &ldquo;Love two!&rdquo;, squeak of tennis shoes, grunt of overreaching, all dozen extant tennis quips &ldquo;Just out!&rdquo; or, &ldquo;About right for you?&rdquo; or, &ldquo;Want to change partners?&rdquo; and  into  right angles and unhesitating lines of this arena where every man grows old pursuing that repertoire of perfect shots, darkness already in his strokes, even in death cramps waving an arm back and forth to the disgust of the night nurse, and smiling; and a few hours later found dead  the smile still in place but the ice bag she left on the brow now inexplicably Scotchtaped to the right elbow causing all those bright trophies to slip permanently, though not in fact much farther, out of reach, all except the thick-bottomed young man about to doublefault in soft metal on the windowsill: &ldquo;Runner-Up Men's Class B Consolation Doubles St. Johnsbury Kiwanis Tennis Tournament 1969&rdquo;... Clouds come over the moon; all the lines go out. November last year in Lyndonville: it is getting dark, snow starts falling, Zander Rubin wobble-twists his worst serve out of the black woods behind him, Stan Albro lobs into a gust of snow, Don Bredes smashes at where the ball theoretically could be coming down, the snow blows down and swirls about our legs, darkness flows across a disappearing patch of green-painted asphalt in the north country, where four men, half-volleying, poaching, missing, grunting, begging mercy of their bones, hold their ground, as winter comes on, all the winters to come.
Having left the great mean city, I make Shift to pretend I am finally quit of her Though that cannot be so long as I work.  Nevertheless let the petals fall  Fast from the flower of cities all. When I first met her to my child's ear She was an ocean of drums and tumbrils And in my nostrils horsepiss and petrol.  Nevertheless let the petals fall  Fast from the flower of cities all. Next to my peering teens she was foreign Names over winking doors, a kaleidoscope Of wine and ice, of eyes and emeralds.  Nevertheless let the petals fall  Fast from the flower of cities all. Later as a place to live in and love in I jockeyed her fogs and quoted Johnson: To be tired of this is to tire of life.  Nevertheless let the petals fall  Fast from the flower of cities all. Then came the headshrinking war, the city Closed in too, the people were fewer But closer too, we were back in the womb.  Nevertheless let the petals fall  Fast from the flower of cities all. From which reborn into anticlimax We endured much litter and apathy hoping The phoenix would rise, for so they had promised.  Nevertheless let the petals fall  Fast from the flower of cities all. And nobody rose, only some meaningless Buildings and the people once more were strangers At home with no one, sibling or friend.  Which is why now the petals fall  Fast from the flower of cities all.
Maybe they believed anything that solid and big must have eyes and would warn them when Vikings sailed into view. We know nothing about it, this stone stood on end. Why on this spot? That much weight took many men to erect we are certain. In hard wind we imagine men crushed under the stone and the trying again. In soft light we see horses and rope. When modern and think we think ancient, we say phallic symbol or breast. Tired we say God and tower guard. Let them know we are strong. After we love we say it's a signal to birds: come home. It occurs to the poor, this is a sign of surrender. To any invader, it said: sail in and take me. And says it today. After awhile you'll forget why you came. In time you won't know what I say.
That rock shaped like a ship might scare us now but we know stone is stone, the cross is ornament, no mast. And danger never comes by sea today. The tile is not original. One must crawl on dirt to watch the west through peepholes dark men cut and one must sleep there snug in rumor (there is no crusade) and wake when one oar creaks because the sea is night. Our milk and  insist we nap against a parapet of sun. To sailors this stone bulk could never be just ruins in the moon. Remember forts at home, thick logs and flints and photos of the men? Here, the pines are thin. A painter-spy tried hard but got it wrong. The main room held an extra hundred all with spears. The cries of first invaders on the rock below were waves. The final clash was sun tomorrow and the empty sea. That cross is really recent and the stains we thought were blood are flowers in the cracks. Perhaps they wept and cursed the barren sea and screamed at night: when will Christians come? Let's take our orange peels home. Those glints are gulls or rough spots on the sea. Time has bombed the spears away and men who can't be photoed must have turned toward the mountain and the gleaming town, memorizing nouns and starting up the stone.
Once a time is how the baby asks for a story wandering from person to person patiently seeking a teller of Three Bears or Riding Hood to take him in. Clutching the book he pleads with his nine-year-old cousin Once a time? Have it? meaning to solve the mystery of words he has come to love but cannot unlock. Once when my father's heart was starting to stop I took him blackberry jam and we sat in his cubicle in the Pennsylvania Graduate Hospital spreading its sugar on saltines, not so much a study in contrasts as a way safely to touch. I was glad that my father had died, his optimism intact, the year before Jack Kennedy was shot and Jackie sat wiping his blood and brains from her suit. Glad that my father was spared that televised vision. In once a time a different language is spoken. The landscape is sweet there, free of briar or bracken. The animals talk in reasonable tones that children can understand. As tonight at the stove three women converse over berries, mashing the afternoon's pickings with sugar in the pot. This is the height of the season, ripeness enfolds us. My daughters and I remember the absent enthusiast, the goddess, my mother who sieved seeds from gallons of pulp with a fervor we cannot match, though we long to extend the continuum. Meanwhile at the kitchen table a game begins with dice and six counters and a book of questions. The categories are constant: always Sports, Geography, Current Events, History and the Arts (largely cinema stars the vintage of Liz Taylor), a game the nine-year-old is intent on winning while the baby wanders from player to player inquiring have it? and wax is melted to seal the jars. A benevolent rain swells tomorrow's cucumbers and reddening tomatoes (what else must I save?) as the axis turns, spilling us into fall until, in tears now with his have it? the tired baby will have it all.
As the waves of perfume, heliotrope, rose, Float in the garden when no wind blows, Come to us, go from us, whence no one knows; So the old tunes float in my mind, And go from me leaving no trace behind, Like fragrance borne on the hush of the wind. But in the instant the airs remain I know the laughter and the pain Of times that will not come again. I try to catch at many a tune Like petals of light fallen from the moon, Broken and bright on a dark lagoon, But they float away for who can hold Youth, or perfume or the moon's gold?
Ah me! too soon the Autumn comes Among these purple-plaintive hills! Too soon among the forest gums Premonitory flame she spills, Bleak, melancholy flame that kills. Her white fogs veil the morn, that rims With wet the moon-flow'r's elfin moons; And, like exhausted starlight, dims The last slim lily-disk; and swoons With scents of hazy afternoons. Her gray mists haunt the sunset skies, And build the west's cadaverous fire, Where Sorrow sits with lonely eyes, And hands that wake her ancient lyre, Beside the ghost of dead Desire.
Some unimportant word or phrase runs through my mind, on and off, for days. <> <> Tonight I'm blank, burnt out, parked in the garage, with the engine running, in the dark. The ones who know me hold me at arm's length, the others want to see me dead. Not yet. I tear the last match from the book, fetch it hard and once across the windscreen. In the glass I'm taken with myself, caught in the act  conducting light, until the heat licks up against my thumb and fingertips, unlocks my hand, gives me a start, trips something in the flashbulb of my heart.
y is a WELL KNOWN ATHLETE'S BRIDE (lullaby) &amp; z &equals;an infrafairy of floating ultrawrists who lullabylullaby (I could have been You,You might have been I) &ldquo;?&rdquo; quoth the front;and there was yz SHOT AND KILLED her (in his arms)Self &amp; Him self in the hoe tell days are teased: let(however)us Walk very(therefore and)softly among one's own memory(but)along perhaps the By invisibilities spattered(or if it may be socalled)memory Of(without more ado about less than nothing) 2 boston. Dolls;found with Holes in each other 's lullaby and other lulla wise by UnBroken LULLAlullabyBY the She-in-him with the He-in-her(&amp; both all hopped up)prettily then which did lie Down,honestly now who go(BANG(BANG
O eh lee! La la! Donna! Donna! Blue is the sky of Palermo;  Blue is the little bay; And dost thou remember the orange and fig, The lively sun and the sea-breeze at evening? Hey la! Donna! Donna! Maria! O eh li! La la! Donna! Donna! Grey is the sky of this land. Grey and green is the water. I see no trees, dost thou? The wind Is cold for the big woman there with the candle. Hey la! Donna! Donna! Maria! O eh li! O la! Donna! Donna! I sang thee by the blue waters; I sing thee here in the grey dawning. Kiss, for I put down my guitar; I'll sing thee more songs after the landing. O Jesu, I love thee! Donna! Donna! Maria!
It was enough of a thrill to ride the bus down Dequindre to Universal City our first indoor mall, to drool over posters of naked women at Spencer's Gifts pointing and laughing till we got kicked out, even Sonny who told his mother what CMF meant so we had to change the name of our bowling team. It was enough of a thrill to eat burgers at the Red Barn across from the mall much less have some guy pull a gun. We ducked but he didn't shoot. His girlfriend and another guy eating hamburgers together. The guy with the gun swore and cried as the cops carried him away. We were so high on that danger, when Fred tried to spit and it landed on his pants, we didn't even laugh. No matter what we thought we were not Crazy Mother Fuckers  we'd only recently explained to Larry what you did to make babies. He said  and ran away. Who could blame him then for not being able to imagine it, his father a short bald accountant older than all our fathers, his mother too shy to answer the door. Universal City, Red Barn, breaking up the soft Jell-O of another summer day. Soon enough we'd be puking on the sides of cars and trying to force ourselves on any girl we could get within arm's reach. Soon enough we'd fall in love hard enough to embarrass ourselves in public places. It wasn't the last time we'd see a gun. Four years later, Fred's brother stole a car, shot some guy, gave him a last beer, then finished him off. Those summer days moved slow and thick as hot tar. We wanted anything that'd speed them up. But even then the underground streams were flowing, gurgling to the surface in remote spots. Universal City seemed light years away then, and a man with a gun crying over a woman was a man from another planet, a faint speck in the distant sky.
We watch ourselves on television in the rain, disputing our language in the other tongue. The government messenger, come to view the picturesque, is caught in the storm under downpouring skies. People we know, friends, acquaintances, point at the ruddy Saxon face, and have their say. We lip-read his curses bleeped from the soundtrack. By now he'll be on the motorway, or in the easing glow of the hotel, towelling rain from his yellow hair, shaking off the words like bees, picking the stings from his skin. We switch off the news, listen to the rain falling fluent, filling the Bwdram, the Glowan and the Clettwr, finding its tongue in the ancient dark of the deepest aquifers.
Don't forget, dear departing saint: you see red, you faint, at the sight of blood. And there's always the danger you may be understood, as never   before, misconstrued by some   casual stranger. Your bluebeard   motives all over the toilet floor,   only your lifelong good name will go to hell: the rest of you, wrapped in kitchen-cloth bandages, waits in line, in a one-bulb lawcourt with in-laws for lawyers; your poor heart   pounds on hospital images,   tetanus, the bluntness of knives,   the corpse's nose-hair, and how awful   if found dead in such yellowed underwear. Better not attempt that suicide, for you may find you've already died and there's nothing left to kill. Worse still, you may die formally now, yet live on forever in spite of what those doctors certify: your self now a mere odourless soul, a see-through man-shaped hole in the air, a late lamenting ghost looking in vain for an empty seat at the full house of your posthumous fame where you can see but not hear the rain of applause, the jangle of medals on the breast of your happy unhappy widow. Though you're there you wish you really were, wish the rain or a touch of that intangible breast, even that garden hose full blast on the rosebush would quench the icy fire, the love you hate, that burns, consumes, yet leaves you whole. Desire, bodiless, is endless. Remember what the wise callous hindus said when the love-god burned: keep your cool, make for love's sake no noble gesture. All symbol, no limbs, a nobody all soul, O Kama, only you can have no use for the      Ashes have no posture.
The family moving into the house were told   To make themselves at home. But dropping their things in a heap in the bare centre   Of the largest, warmest room, They had wondered how in hell they could cook a meal   For twelve in a strange kitchen (What with the brothers so drunk on the national drink   And the grandchildren Wailing the infant anthems     Or     But they found the cooking terribly easy, for here   Was a fridge, a working oven With even a clock, and here was a pile of matching   Yellow plates: five, six, seven.
Just looking at them I grow greedy, as if they were freshly baked loaves waiting on their shelves to be broken open that one and that and I make my choice in a mood of exalted luck, browsing among them like a cow in sweetest pasture. For life is continuous as long as they wait to be read these inked paths opening into the future, page after page, every book its own receding horizon. And I hold them, one in each hand, a curious ballast weighting me here to the earth.
Upon a grave In the churchyard as I lay, An angel out of heaven Came to me and he did say: Your child is dead, He singeth far away, In Death is sorrow shed, In Death is sorrow shed. I raised my head And mournfully I cried: My son is dead I was with him when he died. He lies alone, And worms his flesh divide. In life is sorrow known, In life is sorrow known.
Last years of Empire and the fifth of War and CAMP coffee extract on the kitchen table. The Sikh that served the officer I saw on the label in the label in the label continuously cloned beyond my eyes, beyond the range of any human staring, down to amoeba, atom, neutron size but the turbaned bearer never lost his bearing and nothing shook the bottle off his tray. Through all infinity and down to almost zero he holds out and can't die or fade away loyal to the breakfasting Scots hero. But since those two high summer days the US dropped the World's first A-bombs on, from that child's forever what returns my gaze is a last chuprassy with all essence gone.
Stage-lit streets Downtown Frisco whizzing past, buildings ranked by Freeway balconies Bright Johnnie Walker neon sign Christmastrees And Christmas and its eves in the midst of the same deep wood as every sad Christmas before, surrounded by forests of stars  Metal columns, smoke pouring cloudward, yellow-lamp horizon warplants move, tiny planes lie in Avionic fields  Meanwhile Working Girls sort mail into the red slot Rivers of newsprint to soldiers' Vietnam <> Social Register, Wichita Star And Postoffice Christmas the same brown place mailhandlers' black fingers dusty mailbags filled 1948 N.Y. Eighth Avenue was or when Peter drove the mailtruck 1955 from Rincon Annex  Bright lights' windshield flash, adrenalin shiver in shoulders Around the curve crawling a long truck 3 bright green signals on forehead Jeweled Bayshore passing the Coast Range one architect's house light on hill crest . . . . . . . . . . . . . negro voices rejoice over radio Moonlit sticks of tea Moss Landing Power Plant shooting its cannon smoke across the highway, Red taillight speeding the white line and a mile away Orion's muzzle raised up to the center of Heaven.
It shouldn't be such a bad day. Tony and I are delivering copies of  to newsagents in north London. One of us drives the van, while the other dashes inside with the invoice book. Most of the shops in this area have been taken over by Ugandan Asians who sit under canopies of soft porn wobbling their heads at us: &lsquo;As you see, we have so little room for display purposes ...&rsquo; Judging from the miles of overlapping buttocks and tits, this month's position is down on all fours in &lsquo;the den&rsquo;, the woman's face crushed in a tiger skin. &lsquo;Forgive me, sir,&rsquo; says the manager, flicking the pages of our fine but slow-moving publication. &lsquo;This sort of thing ...&rsquo; He pauses for a moment at  by Ian McEwan. &lsquo;If we are honest, it only hangs around collecting dust ...&rsquo;
The lion evening is untamed because Some broken relics from the past of man Exert their splendid force against the laws, Being liberated and American. &lsquo;Evil, be thou my good.&rsquo; Declining sun Shaking his head in the disastered west Completes the moral pilgrimage, begun With secret tremblings of an exile's breast. Domestic Adam, father of the race, Haunts the recess of every homely tree And his injunctions mark the human face With darkening wrinkles of malignity. Flinging away his broken crusts and pans, A panting savage hurries to the woods, And in ecstatic ruin dumbly stands Glad to behold the murder of his goods. The light recedes and the grey chimneys rise Against the noisy havoc, tall and grim. Reflections of the fire catch human eyes, And each man waits the fate that waits for him.
Arise! arise! my fellow-men, Arise, with might and main;  Arise, with intellectual din, And cast aside your chains! For, like a web around us bound, This chain hath long entwined;  It brought a mighty nation down, And humbled low their minds. How oft we're quelled when 'tempt to rise,  By envy and disdain; And ofttimes wipe our tearful eyes, And try no more our chains. Oh! tear them loose in union's strength! We'll not be trampled down;  We'll reach the promise land at length, Behold the Ethiope's crown!
In your time, there have been those who spoke clearly For the moment of lightning. Were we all brave, but at different times? Even raped open and split, even anonymous, They spoke.They are not forgotten. But they are.In late summer; forgot; caught at cross- purposes, Interrupted in an hour of purity, Their lives careening along in the fierce cities, Through atrocious poverties and magnificence, The unforgotten, the early gone forgot. Late daytime, and nothing left to hide but an eye endowed With the charred, guilty, gouged by war, the raging splendor; Despised like you, criminal in intent; sunburnt, in love and splendid; This heart, naked and knocking, going in clouds, Smoke and a cry of light. In pain, the voice of pain.The shadow of your cry. And never forget:you are magnificent beyond all colors.
This old piano with a sweeter treble and a strong deep voice, to you we brothers give: no longer inconsolably grieve, Sally, that the calm stream and brilliant ripple o' Scarlatti and gleaming Haydn are unplayable; this quaint old box of strings will not deceive your touch but courteously come alive, the action is brand new and serviceable. I came upon you weeping in despair seated at a bad piano in the circumstances of life.God knows how far beyond me this world is, where brute pain redoubles bafflement, and yet we in- novate this detail and that detail repair. I start awake at night afraid of death gasping for air exclaiming O my God! and sit up shuddering heart pounding hard. But when I school my thoughts and catch my breath and recollect myself my forty-fourth year of discouragement, in this loveless bed in this cold-moonlit lonely countryside in America where my best has no worth, why, it would be comfortable to be dead, death is like sleep that I often woo, to cease my nagging to attempt anew where I have no resources; why do I fight to wake up in panic, scream with dread, and clutch at the bedclothes afraid to die?
If I were doing my Laundry I'd wash my dirty Iran I'd throw in my United States, and pour on the Ivory Soap, scrub up Africa, put all the birds and elephants back in the jungle, I'd wash the Amazon river and clean the oily Carib &amp; Gulf of Mexico, Rub that smog off the North Pole, wipe up all the pipelines in Alaska, Rub a dub dub for Rocky Flats and Los Alamos, Flush that sparkly Cesium out of Love Canal Rinse down the Acid Rain over the Parthenon &amp; Sphinx, Drain the Sludge out of the Mediterranean basin &amp; make it azure again, Put some blueing back into the sky over the Rhine, bleach the little Clouds so snow return white as snow, Cleanse the Hudson Thames &amp; Neckar, Drain the Suds out of Lake Erie Then I'd throw big Asia in one giant Load &amp; wash out the blood &amp; Agent Orange, Dump the whole mess of Russia and China in the wringer, squeeze out the tattletail Gray of U.S. Central American police state, &amp; put the planet in the drier &amp; let it sit 20 minutes or an Aeon till it came  out clean.
A simple man, He liked the crease on the water His cast made, but had no pity For the broken backbone Of water or fish. One of his pleasures, thirsty, Was to ask a drink At the hot farms; Leaving with a casual thank you, As though they owed it him. I could have told of the living water That springs pure. He would have smiled then, Dancing his speckled fly in the shallows, Not understanding.
The distance between stars is a calculation of angles, orbits, lines of sight and partial perigons. The size of a star is a function of its colour. Stars do not twinkle; they are huge balls of fire that would overwhelm us were they any nearer. Thank heavens they are so far away. The rays of light from the furthest stars set off before the last grunt of the dinosaurs but are bright enough to guide the flight of starlings. Don't suppose for a moment that the stars are fixed; each cluster is careering forward like a bolas. Even so, it's safe for captains to steer their courses by them. If Sirius were bound in this direction at six times the speed of the fastest projectile that ever left the muzzle of a great gun, it wouldn't much trouble your great great-granddaughter or even offset the next ice age. That crater near Winslow, Arizona, is altogether another matter. One cubic inch of a star in Ursa Minor weighs well over a ton, and serves as a reminder of the dangers of catching falling stars. Those who travel to the stars and back will find an added distance in their brothers' eyes. The speed of light is a treacherous thing.
As in any sanctified church, menagerie is home: birds, exotic plants, books perch on the active mind when she hosted lunch, always working lunch but not institutional fare, it was to read, lecture, and teach for the students needed an example, and spouses, and a wary kitchen staff at attention, ready to be quizzed. One does many shuffles on the doorstep, up or down, into one's drawing room, an ongoing conversation, how to fetch, recall, retrieve: everywhere there is a Minnesota connection. Dinner begins with Sheridan scotch, which would be malt in the categories of high and low barley, mountain pass, glen; one is always on Sheridan Island. With that peculiar edge of maternity, husbanding resources, community work, group entertainment, she is no day at the beach; like her clothes, expensive, unobtrusive, preeminently in charge, she has text, has written it, hones context, laughs into her mustache, holds back, lofts ahead. One source of great pain are the rituals of race and agony to me too, but to her &ldquo;illiterate,&rdquo; as in bookshelf, which she goes to in military speed. First edition of  with markings of rereading, in hard cover, since publication: what I take this gift to mean: thematics of citizenship, bird imagery for flight, many landing spaces in the seams of the text, which, like water, is rippling, has a flowchart, glass, and the rivets of a rocky beach; always with obligations to feed the young, those who gauge their educations, in the formal sense, as truncated, &ldquo;straight, no chaser&rdquo; hazard pay, changing the gender in dialogue, suffering fools, for she had enemies: who were they? The territory is within us: sustain, maintain, renew, populate, enhance, expand, as in menu, cookware, cuisine, tableware, an accumulation, command decisions, abstract and in praxis, as in efficacies of command. You could take orders from this woman; you would like it.
The worst is still to come When the blackness creeps out of milk And the stone coughs up its secret pit Which will prove to be just another stone, And this old board lets out a yell Which it held since the time it was still a seed, A yell more like a sudden light Than a sound, And this chair will reveal itself As the exact shadow of someone Who stood here all this time So that these words may step out of their winter Or grains of salt (it's the same thing). I say nothing of crows cawing And the language of rustling grasses But there'll be plenty of that, Plus the roar of the ocean, Its obscure aphorism spelled out  Then, at last, we'll get a true taste of ourselves. The ear will crawl back into the eye Like Jonah into his whale. When the knife beds down in the flesh And flows away with the blood, The anchor that keeps you in this old life Will be lifted. In any case, it's only an instant That you have to worry about. The body Will rise from the floor like a soap-bubble To fall back with its old familiar thud.
Jerky dance of dune weeds looped-over twigs scribble wind-and-flower notes forever, in the sand  Hadleypissingshakes his cock in the desert  Beating wings of a raven just at dawn. The same first bird chirps at the first light. hair, teeth, spit, breath, backbone, asshole, hip joints, knees, ball of the foot. knuckles, back of the hands. piss-hard-ons at dawn. Lazy to get up and scuff the chilly sand crap by lantern light.  hiss of wings  gone. Comb the sand down from my hair. &ldquo;off&rdquo; and away.apart.separating.peeling back. a-way.a &ldquo;ways off&rdquo; he's &ldquo;off&rdquo;  the &ldquo;offing&rdquo;  hot breath breathing down my neck. fuzz burrs thorns tiny hairsstickers, fluff down stickem.fly or be carried be ate and be shat out. moving the seed around. Two Ravens talk a bit, Then fly off In opposite directions.
I admit the briar Entangled in my hair Did not injure me; My blenching and trembling Nothing but dissembling, Nothing but coquetry. I long for truth, and yet I cannot stay from that My better self disowns, For a man's attention Brings such satisfaction To the craving in my bones. Brightness that I pull back From the Zodiac, Why those questioning eyes That are fixed upon me? What can they do but shun me If empty night replies?
I have a friend At the end Of the world. His name is a breath Of fresh air. He is dressed in Grey chiffon. At least I think it is chiffon. It has a Peculiar look, like smoke. It wraps him round It blows out of place It conceals him I have not seen his face. But I have seen his eyes, they are As pretty and bright As raindrops on black twigs In March, and heard him say: I am a breath Of fresh air for you, a change By and by. Black March I call him Because of his eyes Being like March raindrops On black twigs. (Such a pretty time when the sky Behind black twigs can be seen Stretched out in one Uninterrupted Cambridge blue as cold as snow.) But this friend Whatever new names I give him Is an old friend. He says: Whatever names you give me I am A breath of fresh air, A change for you.
Her hand sweeps over the rough grained paper, then, with a wet sponge, again. A drop of black is washed grey, cloudy as warm breath fogging cool glass. She feels she must make the best of it, she must get the colour of the stone wall, of the mist settling around twisted birch trees. Her eye doesn't miss the rabbit crouched, a tuft of fog in the tall grass. Nothing to stop the grey sky from merging into stones, or the stone walls from trailing off into sky. But closer, a single iris stands fully opened: dark wrinkled petals, rain-moist, the tall slender stalk sways, her hand follows. Today, even the green is tinged with grey, the stone's shadow lies heavy over the curling petals but there's time enough, she'll wait, study the lopsided shape. The outer green sepals once enclosing the bud lie shrivelled: empty shells spiralling right beneath the petals. As she stares the sun comes out. And the largest petal flushes deep deep violet. A violet so intense it's almost black. The others tremble indigo, reveal paler blue undersides. Thin red veins running into yellow orange rills, yellow flows down the green stem. Her hand moves swiftly from palette to paper, paper to palette, the delicate brush swoops down, sweeps up, moves the way a bird builds its nest. An instant and the sun is gone. Grey-ash-soft-shadows fall again. But she can close her eyes and see red-orange veins, the yellow swept with green throbbing towards blue, and deep inside she feels indigo pulsing to violet.
Shall soul wear thin with passion like a ring Of beaten gold, or like an eagle's claw Grow fine? Shall he become the winds' first king, And tell the afraid rock-children what he saw? Shall he discern the writing-room he left, Wrought with strange books and stories edged with gold? Shall he look down, a king above his cleft, Hurled from pure heaven, and see the world unfold? Shall he ascend in dews of morning's haze Dispersed in atoms, starry-worlded airs, Bright points on the capricious water-blaze, Or under sea burn lamps of midnight fairs? Shall soul, passed through so many golden rings Nearer the heart's thread and the finger old, Sleep, as an eagle sleeps on widespread wings, When blind dawn deluges the world in gold? Shall he, like Dante in his course of love, Climb to the place where eagles cannot look, Drink the clear stream, or with Cocytus move Under the world, where lies the greatest book? Shall he be pierced to death by cruel eyes, Love's mistress with the vampire's ecstasy, Fall to the malice of his enemies, Or curse the cold moon by an exile's sea? Shall soul teach stillness to become more still As ancient pitchers do, that some dead hand So shaped that none can fathom their dead will Or penetrate the aura where they stand? Shall soul fall softly like the one dead bloom Too light for human ears, or like a wave Thunder through rocks of adamantine doom Binding love's two dreads to a single grave? All demons scorn, but man was born to bear, Where two great passions meet, the spark and shock. Stone-like the eagle drops, his heart is there; Stone-like he drops; he hears his great heart knock. Stone-like the eagle drops, shakes off the air Of murderous winds, of storms that tower and mock, Safe. Though his plumage glitters for despair, All that he loves lies naked in the rock.
The beeches towering high Greenly cloud the sky. The shadows all are green With living sun unseen. O wonderful the sound Of green leaves all around, When nothing yet is heard Of windy branches stirred But wavering lights alone Innumerably blown Come trembling, and then cease Upon a trembling peace. What breathed in it? A sigh? Or something yet more shy Of speech? A spirit-kiss? A waft of fairy bliss That seeks for voice on our Lips, there to find its flower In some sweet syllable? O Love, I cannot tell; But light brims in your eyes And makes divine replies.
The non-action of the wise man is not inaction. It is not studied. It is not shaken by anything. The sage is quiet because he is not moved, Not because he  Still water is like glass. You can look in it and see the bristles on your chin. It is a perfect level; A carpenter could use it. If water is so clear, so level, How much more the spirit of man? The heart of the wise man is tranquil. It is the mirror of heaven and earth The glass of everything. Emptiness, stillness, tranquillity, tastelessness, Silence, non-action: this is the level of heaven and earth. This is perfect Tao. Wise men find here Their resting place. Resting, they are empty. From emptiness comes the unconditioned. From this, the conditioned, the individual things. So from the sage's emptiness, stillness arises: From stillness, action. From action, attainment. From their stillness comes their non-action, which is also action And is, therefore, their attainment. For stillness is joy. Joy is free from care Fruitful in long years. Joy does all things without concern: For emptiness, stillness, tranquillity, tastelessness, Silence, and non-action Are the root of all things.
Be these the selfsame verses  That once when I was young Charm'd me with dancing magic  To love their foreign tongue, Delicate buds of passion,  Gems of a master's art, That broke forth rivalling Nature  In love-songs of the heart; Like fresh leaves of the woodland  Whose trembling screens would house The wanton birdies courting  Upon the springing boughs? Alas, how now they are wither'd!  And fallen from the skies In yellowy tawny crumple  Their tender wreckage lies, And all their ravisht beauty  Strewn 'neath my feet to-day Rustles as I go striding  Upon my wintry way.
If it were solely three Croatian workers talking of war in Croatia who made me shut my eyes, even to their city on the sea Assisi-like, smoking, where a stair tread though grooved smooth leads to no exit; if them alone, I wouldn't have shuddered at the impulse to grow dark, sporadic but twisting from the core, then at its raw opposite, Henry lunging down passageways cursing his sons and Eleonore, Harry craving some bless&egrave;d door, a young queen hot between aging sheets, or a crack shearing through the stone roof to grant him different issue out over rivers, flocks, forests, cunny's gate or bird's beak for blood's ire  shivered at all of it and longed to turn it into a turning, only thus to see nothing though it all be there, blink all gates blind though the wall rear up. Then it came, swinging from the side, a tunnel. Rumbling tons aimed us with a steward two carriages ahead tilting a tinkling tray of drinks and bent flawlessly, entering  and through that sleeving dark I groped armless, like torsoes in the Book of the Dead (twisting from the seed but not towards darkness), for the skull's ridge, its pale fissure, ladders rotted or thrown down, beginning to remember the steadied river overhead, radiantly fast.
To take the burden and exert oneself As though it were not there, Neither more nor less than one can bear, To do this would be wise  But the old are weak and on the shelf And the young have shining eyes. To keep our bonds in tension, plumb the night, Renounce the soothing lie, From all the routines and the customs fly, To do this would be wise  But the old are stale in the morning light And the young have shining eyes. To shape one's inner image silently Though human and infirm, Preserving love against the secret worm, To do this would be wise  But the old are still as a fallen tree And the young have shining eyes.
Ducks in the pond, icecream &amp; beer, all remind me of West Acton, Mass  where I lived when young in a large old house with 14 rooms and woods out back. Last night I talked to a friend &amp; his wife about loons &amp; wildcats and how to live on so much money per month. Time we all went home, or back, to where it all was, where it all was.
Fool, put your adventures into those things which break ships   not female flesh. Let there pass over the mind the waters of four oceans, the airs of four skies! Return hollow-bellied, keen-eyed, hard! A simple scar or two. Little girls will come bringing you roses for your button-hole.
Hip boots Deep in the blues (And I never had a hip boot on). Hair Blowing back in the wind (And I never had that much hair). Diamonds in pawn (And I never had a diamond In my natural life). Me In the White House (And ain't never had a black house). Do, Jesus! Lord! Amen!
Here I am cutting you these fresh healthy flowers from my sick bed where I toss with nickel illuminations. Time is a fever that burns in the pores consuming everything the mind creates. I send you this cool arrangement of dream blossoms these tender stems &amp; shining leaves while I shiver &amp; detect in your own eyes of gentle remove a similar disgust with what has come to our fat cancerous land of the sensual circus &amp; the disembodied broadcast wave, swallowing in sorrow to hear the old hatred &amp; undercover selfishness rumbling back up from the bosoms of men out into the good open air. May these new flowers from the forest of my heart bring you a breath of the joy men must believe they are going to recover by moving again &amp; again against one another.
The faces of Americans sit open hating each other. The black ones hating, though they laugh and are controlled by laughter. The white ones blown up hot inside, their projects are so profitable ... sixteen stories in a sultry town ... wind bends them back. These are boxes of money. With lids these winds wont lift. Winds from foodless mouths. Steel boxes floating in tears. In panama hats and floppy pants in love with happy tasteful God. They own him. But what do they own? And can it be chewed to a liquid? They own each other. They own my mother. They own and own, go on, what else is theirs? Time. Time is. The pop of the clock, your head on the block. Or your wife, another life, to fly us back to historical hate. They own numbers. But not the strong ones. One Two Three, they own. And squared. Halved. Sent for over the telephone. They own language. Churches. But not the strong ones. Four Five Six, they own. But not Beaulah Bapt. or Drifting Image Church Of Christ In Dreams. Where the old ladies fan themselves with God. And  what else, moving on the cobblestones. What possibly else, could there be. Can you see? The light's so bad. Have you paid the bill? Light and sound, are tied and sealed. Music. They got that too. Listen to Benny cut his bread with a mouth piece. You know they got that. Probably, anything fat. Wind, the spirit of skinniness. Blow wind! Spirits mumble in the sun. Skirting the water with shadowless grace.
Love, there have necessarily been others When we are forced apart Into far-off continents and islands Either to sleep alone with an aching heart Or admit casual lovers ... Is the choice murderous? Seven years have passed Yet each remains the other's perfect love And must continue suffering to the last ... Can continence claim virtue in preserving An oath hurtful and gruelling? Patience! No firm alternative can be found To absolute love; we therefore plead for none And are poets, thriving all hours upon true magic Distilled from poetry such love being sacred And its breach wholly beyond absolution.
Now I see that the first boy I loved loved speed for its own sake the way we all loved our bodies before learning to feel ashamed. He built plywood ramps on parking lots all over town and crouched on a skateboard as it swooped and shot across asphalt. His orange VW careened down steep mountain roads the one night we sneaked off and drove almost to dawn. Yet he could be patient, sweet, unable to believe I'd never been kissed at fifteen, though I earnestly practiced tilting my head back, fluttering eyelids, tonguing the end of my fist so I'd know what to do when he took me in his arms in the dark in the woods when I would not refuse what I knew must be the drive that can wreck a girl, despite her own intentions. That whole brutal summer I pulled weeds in my father's garden, my body stunned by its great momentum and a halting restraint like bad brakes. Once I stood up light-headed in the sun certain I'd drop over dead with desire, dense and pure as lead in my veins, but I never succumbed, and in the end we both accused the other of loving less. For the next decade I plodded through school and married while he dropped out, drove customized vans to dealers throughout the Midwest, then moved east, delivering papers too precious to fax. Last I heard, he works for the railroad running freight through Pennsylvania at night when tracks are clear of passenger trains. Sometimes I wake to a distant whistle and think of his engine somewhere in the mountains rushing toward Baltimore or Williamsport, nothing to stop him.
&ldquo;Which in this bar, as they stay or go, is the god in disguise and everything will otherwise be when I know? Ah, is it you who staggering loom in the door as to the dying king came happy Hercules and hiccuped and began to sing?&rdquo; So joked the god in disguise. &ldquo;Or maybe you who add the row of numbers and sit listening or don't listen, yet know know; so Klamm sat in the village inn dipping a pen, the pen was scratching, he did not need to lift his eyes, Franz's heart was thundering &rdquo; So anxiously the god in disguise. &ldquo;To Aeneas when the undertow spewed him hardly alive in the morning, his mother with a Tyrian bow came bare-knee'd forward as the spring, just as this waitress comes to bring my dinner I am otherwise at a loss for a next thing.&rdquo; So at a loss the god in disguise. &ldquo;You unknown god, I feel your wing close in this tavern, and it is the instant of its opening!&rdquo; cried out and rose the god in disguise.
I knew her at once: I'd've known her anywhere from the thumbnail sketch, a fair likeness in phone-booths, in clubs, in pubs just at eye-level (for the average man) on the pepper-and-salt roughcast above the urinal so you caught her name and number in the very moment you laid a hand to your dick and then you'd be stuck, your focus fixed on Mlle Stiletto, or else Dominique, Domino, Dominatrix. Whoever you wanted most. Whoever racked you best. <> as she set her lips four-square against your lips to give you a taste of paradise lost, the very taste you'd agreed to forswear. Not me, however; I was there to put her to the test, and that I did, working her through each  Delilah, Delores, Deluxe, until we must have passed a jigger of spit between us, a jigger if not a bumper, which left me laid out and counting stars in the glimpse of sky you get from her basement window unless she pulls that roller-blind with its blinding <> to a morning you might have opened your window to twenty or thirty years ago, the sun red-raw like something skinned, the sea sharp blue, breakwaters, a beach, the bright white scarp of a cliff, a cave shelving off steep as a mineshaft, and someone about to make the dark descent. &lsquo;... or I could just as well be myself ...&rsquo; as she came back in with Absolut and ice on a lordly dish, making space amid the pilferage and pelf (&lsquo;All in a day's work&rsquo;) and when she enfolded me, herself was who she became: her sudden blondeness, the strawberry blaze on the boss of her shoulder, the light line of down that ran to the point of her jaw, the hang of her head, when she enfolded me, the fold of her knee, the cr&ecirc;py quoit of her arsehole, the cr&ecirc;pe of her footsole.
As I stood by the stair-head in the upper hall  The rooms to left and right were locked as before.  It was senseless to hammer at an unreal door Painted on the plaster of a ten-foot wall. There was half-light here, piled darkness beyond  Rising up sheer as the mountain of Time,  The blank rock-face that no thought can climb, Girdled around with the Slough of Despond. I stood quite dumb, sunk fast in the mire,  Lonely as the first man, or the last man,  Chilled to despair since evening began, Dazed for the memory of a lost desire. But a voice said &lsquo;Easily&rsquo;, and a voice said &lsquo;Come!&rsquo;  Easily I followed with no thought of doubt,  Turned to the right hand, and the way stretched out; The ground held firmly; I was no more dumb. For that was the place where I longed to be,  And past all hope there the kind lamp shone,  The carpet was holy that my feet were on, And logs on the fire lay hissing for me. The cushions were friendship and the chairs were love,  Shaggy with love was the great wolf skin,  The clock ticked &lsquo;Easily&rsquo; as I entered in, &lsquo;Come,&rsquo; called the bullfinch from his cage above. Love went before me; it was shining now  From the eyes of a girl by the window wall,  Whose beauty I knew to be fate and all By the thin red ribbon on her calm brow. Then I was a hero and a bold boy  Kissing the hand I had never yet kissed;  I felt red ribbon like a snake twist In my own thick hair, so I laughed for joy. I stand by the stair-head in the upper hall;  The rooms to the left and right are locked as before.  Once I found entrance, but now never more, And Time leans forward with his glassy wall.
If we spend our life remembering what we love, to be sure who we are, Graham endures like ivy. Even if I were, and I wasn't, the poisoner, nine dogs to my credit, I still might own by right of blood the long poplar windbreak by the road. If I were the bigot who ran the bar, September still might die forever in the fern. Whatever's sad about moving away is a replay in the throat of some old deeper grief we'd rather forget. Again, my car, not old this time, not burning oil, dives down the hill I've hoarded twenty years to Graham. All's improved. Fat dogs doze in buttercups and the kind author of books about peach trees waves from his porch. And things are the same. Poplars sway like early girls in dream and sun flushes the swallows who ride thermals wisely into the world of black dazzle and take their place with the stars.
in autumns what i remember is my father and uncles gathering buckets and rakes doing the earth's duty with a calm and ritual therapy they worked the wrinkled, sunset leaves into mountains like a sacrifice of lovely and faded women the men gave leaves to fire the smoke would rise black and full of husky sexual smell the men would lean on their rakes and watch their children would flutter and swirl around the smoke and bodies my father would gather the ashes into buckets and discard them  now this daughter is fallen, sunsets, and gathering her body for giving it is a new time, for life and fire must be fed
I was trying to be beautiful with lousy tools, fried food and crowded avenues, a botanical garden of tight dresses on jampacked buses. So I got to be shabbily beautiful and that's not nothing. I walked around a lot stupefied by everything I saw, never really sure how much I wanted what I wanted so much, or how much I wanted to get into a yellow european car and drive out to the end of the road and listen to the droll boredoms of natural order tree after tree. Wood does a lot of complaining. When you watch a brook shushing over rocks the first thing it washes away is your life, then everybody's separate life and all that culture built tenements and cathedrals for the sake of which you I mean I was ready to embrace every shadow and declare its purport in a world ever hungry for new meanings it will pay no more attention to than to the old, though it loves to have those hot young interpretations coming, we gaudy josephs they buy up and ignore. So I opened my druid maw and chanted a dream of hips and the hips of dream, the cathedral of gongs and the park of pure money until I made no more sense than an opera. Listening to what I had been saying, I thought: What a lot he had on his mind, how many interpretations of so few experiences. He never left his body for a second, never fled the old phone exchanges of Brooklyn, Taylor and Esplanade and Nightingale and Nevins, whose codes still catalogue his coeds and his heart. He still has his ear pressed to that sweaty receiver lust-crazed for (he thinks) interstellar static made by sparrows on the phoneline at his window.
Rippling hospital sheets circle your brown body and you sink for the third time, ready to rise alone on the other side. I reach out for you and pull and pull until your skin tears from the bones of elbow, arm, wrist, and fingers. How it hangs empty, loose. A glove too large for my hand.
Shadows fall between people when they walk in the sun. Doubts grow in the dark and by dawn the window is tangled in vines. Scaffoldings grid the steeple when time's work is done. Moss grows on the bark of the oak, wrinkles on a brow, as men explode stepping on mines. Women circumambulate the peepul tree hoping for a son. Daughters breed in stark family dungeons like slow perennials waiting for the rains. War heroes return in special trains covered with blood and flags. They blow bugles at home, brawl in pubs, and bark orders at dogs, kill and flay twenty-one nurses and hang one from a maple.
this is Haiti, a state slaves snatched from surprised masters, its high lands, home of this world's sole successful slave revolt, Haiti, where freedom has flowered and flown fascinating like long necked flamingoes gracefully feeding on snails in small pinkish sunset colored sequestered ponds despite the meanness and meagerness of life eeked out of eroding soil and from exploited urban toil, there is still so much beauty here in this land where the sea sings roaring a shore and fecund fertile hills lull and roll quasi human in form there is beauty here in the unyielding way our people, colored charcoal, and banana beige, and shifting subtle shades of ripe mango, or strongly brown-black, sweet as the suck from sun scorched staffs of sugar cane, have decided we shall survive we will live on a peasant pauses clear black eyes searching far out over the horizon the hoe motionless, suspended in the midst of all this shit and suffering forced to bend low still we stop and stand and dream and believe we shall be released we shall be released for what slaves have done slaves can do and that begets the beauty slaves can do
<> Only as much As most glittering medaled soldier, Which is to say: Very much. Not library stone lions, they were ravenous and real, Furrily prowling before the purring meal, Already sniffing the juicy snapped jawbone. All he had Was a pocket charm of ideal. Everyone told him that he talked too much. He tried to clutch His good-luck coin and glare the animals down. It felt so icy To his touch ... Longest night he ever sweated through, Straining for clue, While the animals snored, Dreaming sweet dinner dreams Tomorrow would make true. Then whether by indecent fluke or pious moral Stiff-necked in starchy collar Was no concern of his exhausted body: He could afford to let Future ponderers quarrel. It made no difference what the graybeards proved as true. He only knew That dawn was driving through, that soon the day Would dazzlingly arrive. He only knew How good it felt to be alive.
Admire the old man, admire him, admire him, Mocked by the priests of Mary Tudor, given to the flames, Flinching and overcoming the flinching, Cranmer. Admire the martyrs of Bloody Mary's reign, In the shocking arithmetic of cruel average, ninety A year, three-hundred; admire them. But still I cry: Admire the Archbishop, The old man, the scholar, admire him. Not simply, for flinching and overcoming simply, But for his genius, admire him, His delicate feelings of genius, admire him, That wrote the Prayer Book (Admire him!) And made the flames burn crueller. Admire Cranmer!
Glittery river, I said, rise, but it didn't: stop, then, damn it, but it didn't: O river, I said, ruffle blurring windknots up (and that was nice like perch striking roils at surface flies): river, I said, don't turn back, and it eased on by, majestic in the sweetest command.
    &lsquo;Please, ma'am, It's the man with the darkness, come to put the candles out.&rsquo; Our table-talk ran out in shifts and corners; I saw the patch on her grey worsted stockings, Such homely things, down to their last mending, And a face tired out by years of resignation To its own image, wrinkling as she cleaned The stain of living from our host of surfaces. No draught of sound came down the corridor, But where we sat we felt the lustres dim From the best china in its box of mirrors, The keyboard yellowing softly into grey: That presence, bringing such an absence, Now welcomed, not wholly unexpected. It was, perhaps, more a kind of wonder Where he had gathered it: prodigious, rare Like Moly? Dredged or scavenged for? Nourished and fostered by secluding fingers? I thought myself of an old coal-sack Dropped stiff and shining in the summer road. Meanwhile she stood there with her usual patience Laid out before us like a supper-tray, Our faces unresolved between the last of day And anything the clock kept as suggestion; Our eyes lost in chambers, vaults of candles, Each tiny flame bolt upright, still unstirred.
People forget (if they ever knew it) That they hear their own voices Not through their ears But in their own throats. Is there an image as well For every breath of sound? Yes, there's an image But it seldom can be seen. It moves too rapidly And does not linger, It escapes the eye. Yet nothing, sound or sight Is entirely lost every sensation Every face or voice Is stored in the hidden room At the back of the brain. Only the keeper of dreams Has the key to that hidden room.
We heat graves here for winter burials as a kind of foreplay before digging in, to soften the frosthold on the ground before the sexton and his backhoe do the opening. Even the earth resists our flesh in this weather  regards the mess a new grave makes in snow the way a schoolgirl in her new prom dress regards defilement. It is over, though, almost before it's started, almost routine. The locals mount in their brisk procession, the cleric with a few words of release commits the body to its dispossession, then blesses everyone, seen and unseen, against forgetfulness and disbelief.
<> The slopes of evening; trailing soberly Their vestments grey: Far, far away The last red tinge Is fading into brown; So far! So faint! Seen but surmisingly! And now the dusk of evening draws upon That memory of light, And light is gone! The bee Speeds Home ! The beetle's Wing of horn Is booming by! The darkness, Every side, Gathers around On air, And sky, And ground! The trees Sing on the darkness, Far and wide, In cadenced lift of leaves, A tale of morn! And the moon's circle, Silver-faint, and thin, Broods gently on the earth:  There is no sin!
When I look at my room I see powder. Life as a footnote to unwritten literature. The chair with its thick varnish picked up at a junk-shop, heading for a junk-shop, is preparing, even now, to vanish. A few thousand books gathering dust and amber and half the books not read. Literature is this torn old pair of slippers. The plaster flakes and weals above my head continually aspiring to the condition of literature, the facets of a crystal. I listen to a record knowing every voice on it is dead but breathes volumes into my chaotic word-hoard. I inhabit a communal Mus&eacute;e des Beaux Arts where all things learn through error, perfecting their falls from grace. I read the papers for anthologies of terror. And look, a shepherd watches a child fall on to Greek soil, followed by the mother, followed by a man's leg, followed, it seems, by the sky. Literature is Chicken Licken's fellow. When I look at my room I see Greece. The bloody Gods are resting on my two seater settee, modelled on Habitat and falling to pieces now. All will be patched up in God's new city, all will be literature, as perfect as the armour in the basement of the Fitzwilliam; the plates, the pots, the pictures and samplers, and the drafts of Auden, Spender, Tennyson and Yeats.
Driving with mother to the shore, northwest then south from Athens, deep black and straw-gold earth arched with the white ejaculate the mobile force of irrigation, to a mountain pass, as through a mouth, iron-red cliffs above my father's village. Olivegrove, poplar, silverleafed the stark descent, as if his soul had pared the way through these benefic mountains, ridges receding in a haze of heat over the omphalos at Delphi. Adelphae, siblings I and she in the irradiated steam of thyme around that belly. Rust earth, mauve sea, zigzag at zero altitude at dusk, mesh-aproned hills and bell-flocked sheep, home stretch. So much of that acreage and livestock was to burn in August's tilt from rain, watering wheels in charred fields without hoses. We bathed in the sea by the house they built, two weeks unsnarling the garden, dahlia from bougainvillea, arguing only how much salt to eat at last.
Where does the road end? What's at the end of the road? Desires, our labours' prayers: where do they go? Up and down roll the waves of weeping. Ahead us the deepest darkness falls. In which country is the shore? In this trail of a mirage  it seems to me  thirst may not end, and that's the fear that clings. Pain, helmless, its sails ripped to shreds, drifts nowhere.
We are suddenly there In the other place; After the long war Discover peace: I touch your face. The open palm Marries your bone, Beyond all things calm Finds crucial form, Lies still as stone. Flesh is made whole That held us caught. There is no wall. We lie where we fought Lost in pure thought. Our truth is here In this still pond Where without fear The soul's alive beyond What we can understand.
I do not write to you that a boy, knifed in the groin, fell behind the band shell where I ushered for Shakespeare-in-the-Park. I warned people to stay seated, to ignore sirens and lights throbbing red in the humid night. Now I can't sleep, and it's too hot to close windows. Down below, men curse in the street, breaking bottles, and tomorrow I'll find stains on the walk. I spare you these details as sweetly as you spared me all those years of lawn and cricket song, all those August days you scalded skins off tomatoes and squeezed those hot globes into hundreds of jars. You picked corn until your arms welted red, then cut off the kernels, your wrists sticky with its milk  all those identical days of your life, culminating in the sparkling arch of the sprinkler hose, caught in porch light.
We make light so we can see. In the Silurian they made light to see the Silurian. In the Diluvium they made light to see the Diluvium. In Troy they made light to see Troy. And that's how they spotted all those Greeks around them. In the Enlightenment they made light to see the Enlightenment. The same applies today. Indeed certain species developed, such as fireflies, or occupations, such as torch-bearers. A lot of energy is converted into light, electrical and chemical, mechanical and biological. Even a battery is sometimes found. So much light has developed that we can see round corners, that we can see into our stomachs, that we can see into the little roots of night. Not that seeing is any particular fun. But we've got to see in order to make light, light,    light, until we go blind.
Baroque, but beautiful, between the lunes,  The valves of nacre of a mussel-shell,  Behold, a pearl! shaped like the burnished bell Of some strange blossom that long afternoons Of summer coax to open: all the moon's  Chaste lustre in it; hues that only dwell  With purity. . . . It takes me, like a spell, Back to a day when, whistling truant tunes, A barefoot boy I waded 'mid the rocks,  Searching for shells strewn in the creek's slow swirl,  Unconscious of the pearls that round me lay: While, 'mid wild-roses, all her tomboy locks  Blond-blowing, stood, unnoticed then, a girl,  My sweetheart once, the pearl I flung away.
Thoughts of leaving jar me plenty. Full circle upsets always back to where we started; again the plane with gleaming wings awaits us, and like us all it's more fatigued now. Such circles start at dawn, and so they end. As with executions we endure the final night, assess all it has been, this year, this life. I think of Ved, who stood on a traffic island, waves of rickshaws and sacred cows strolling round. &ldquo;For you,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;it is a one-year sentence, for me it is life.&rdquo; What he perceived so clearly, with sadness in his eyes, was fact indeed: I would rescue no one. Like all who came and left, I had not much to give. All journeys reaffirm this. Before night pales they all arrive to hug us  more friends than we left back home. They sit alert as if for birth or death and this seems both. So we take a cab with bags tied on. Our daughters have their final fling on scooters. They flutter like bright flags, right up to the airport's door. Then these bronze swains must leave them, and yet quick vows might be exchanged. I turn from that. With unenlightened eye I gaze on the waiting room. We elders once more swap hugs, farewells, enact that farce  we're pushed through rails and sorted out, some to fly and some to stand their ground. And who's to say who's lucky? To go's a death, to stay a hell. Our final dawn together. Just so, in Calabria, my friend Frederigo wept. He would never see my small son Sam again, held up in arms for farewell kiss, great tears as our train pulled out. A man may weep, aye, even a fat man weeps. And so we leave our nests of straw, thorns through the chanting land, leave old men inside smoke, leave florid crane on one leg standing, stuck in primeval mud, leave lady next to Buddha, and Buddha on his cloud  while children on the ground behind us still stroke hurt wing of a fallen dove. &ldquo;To cure him&rdquo; is what they told me and wished me health as well. A year with no man's curse, or child's, and yet I did not stay. I did not stay and heal.
Teeth are distressing only if you try to save them: say there's a bit of rot spotted under an old crown, no way to get to it, so the dentist recommends splitting the tooth in half, drilling out the dark, putting a gold cap over each root, then uniting the two under a new crown: two little shaved-thin roots sticking up through the gum! the terror, the dark journeys traced through the night of maybe something coming undone or not getting something right, the whole invention maybe finally not holding up, the little gold rod stabilizing that molar to the rest cracking or not quite suiting its groove: the money! whereas the poor and lost wait unconcernedly, chewing away, till the big tooth wobbles and they yank it out: the relief! plenty of bananas, whole wheat bread, skim milk, the provender of paradise, prove the bright flashes of professionals mockeries and pinful wastes, while the unsaved loosen wide smiles.
Here sullen lies their marriage bed, they lie apart, in pain and hatred. Never in foreign lands where none spoke English was he so alone nor she so pale with guilt and fear in schools where they mistreated her. The sheets are rumpled not from kissing or making love but sleepless tossing after they have lain an hour immobile on the bed of fire. Let us survey this Sphinx, this riddle: there is like a chasm down the middle in which have fallen into hell years of their only youth the yell considerately muffled as they try to sleep a little before day.
This gentleman the charming duck Quack quack says he My tail's on Fire, but he's only kidding You can tell that By his grin He's one big grin, from wobbly Feet to wobbly tail Quack quack he tells us Tail's on fire again Ah yes This charming gentleman the duck With His quaint alarms and Trick of walking like a Drunken hat Quack quack says he There's your fried egg
<>  A thread of murmur drawn about the shore,  The journeying of wind across the moor Even and slow and delicate with dew. The peace of ancient sorrow come anew,  The resignation of a great despair  And failing of all struggle into prayer;  The promise of a day is proved untrue. The choired sweetness of home-gathered birds,  The tall gaunt shadows and the mellow light,  The tir&egrave;d leaves that fold against the tree; Within the heart unutterable words,  The pure compassion of the toward night  A day that dies and never more shall be.
Out walking along the river I still saw the fever with her children At supper in the coal light. Snow falling, I climbed up through the wood To the asylum to visit with Sister In the locked ward. But hesitated And went to the cottage to see the insomniac Rich child who sits naked at the window: Last night, in kerosene light, her back Had a quality of milkglass. She curls In the chair. Her knees under her chin, the room black  The light at the window is all Moon and snow. She is at it again: With the nail of the little finger She has flayed The thumb of the same hand; All but the little finger arthritic With the procedure: the raw thumb White like a boiled egg In an upturned palm; the dead skin, Bits of shell, not polished by hen straw. Beyond the window there is a sudden Convulsion of wind in the blue spruce, Boughs dumping snow.  <> <> <> Passes through the child, taking Her attention; She cuts herself for the first time, a trickle Of blood at the knuckle of the thumb Like the single red thread Through the lace hood and jesses Of the Medici falcons. Her concentration broken, the hand Loosens:  The sun is seeping over the snow. She greets me with an acknowledgment One reserves for a ghost.
Frenzy softens the air. The hardly used desire was posted on the outer panel of the blackboard sky. Beneath rows of illustrated fragments, someone whispers and someone listens, and no one agrees on how many were in the bed between one and one equals all the hours you have known or imagined knowing another. The inside of the walls got sticky, and tiny spots of pink paper floated toward the rain spattered clouds. I followed feathers down flagpoles I stood on trains, sat across from and beside I traced the little wigs of a tarnished button, and started eating the perfumed crumbs left out for the leper of milk I licked peeling canisters until rain trickled out of my mouth and pockets I counted the insect vowels missing from the slag heap I inserted a strip of imitation fur into the Book of Neon After he tied her to the bed, she handcuffed him to the stove. Dark aquamarine light slipped off the rounded edges of the upturned venetian blinds, dropping into mirrors fastened at the corners. An old movie flickered on the outer border of their gnawed platform.
Sad-hearted Spirit of the solitudes, Who comest through the ruin-wedded woods! Gray-gowned in fog, gold-girdled with the gloom Of tawny sunsets; burdened with perfume Of rain-wet uplands, chilly with the mist; And all the beauty of the fire-kissed Cold forests crimsoning thy indolent way, Odorous of death and drowsy with decay. I think of thee as seated 'mid the showers Of languid leaves that cover up the flowers,  The little flower-sisterhoods, whom June Once gave wild sweetness to, as to a tune A singer gives her soul's wild melody,  Watching the squirrel store his granary. Or, 'mid old orchards, I have pictured thee: Thy hair's profusion blown about thy back; One lovely shoulder bathed with gypsy black; Upon thy palm one nestling cheek, and sweet The rosy russets tumbled at thy feet. Was it a voice lamenting for the flowers? Or heart-sick bird that sang of happier hours? A cricket dirging days that soon must die? Or did the ghost of Summer wander by?
<> And let us see what we shall see:  A wild green lane of stones and weeds That to a wilder woodland leads. An old board gate, the lichens crust, Whose ancient hinges croak with rust. A vale; a creek; and a bridge of planks, And the wild sunflowers that wall its banks: A path that winds through shine and shade To a ferned and wildflowered forest glade; Where, out of a grotto, a voice replies With a faint  And every wind that passes seems A foot that follows from Lands o' Dreams. A voice, a foot, and a shadow, too, That whispers of things your childhood knew: A girl that waited, a boy that came, And an old beech tree where he carved her name; Where still he sees her, whom still he hears Bidding him come through the long-gone years. . . . How oft she beckons your heart and mine From the farmhouse window trailed deep with vine, And porched with roses! where all must know She used to live in the long-ago. The farmhouse there at the end o' the lane, With the sunset twinkling its windowpane; Where she smiles as she smiled in the Long-ago, The farmer's daughter you used to know, Who has not changed to your heart for years, Though her face you often see through tears: Who wears her youth, as she did of old, As a princess weareth a crown of gold. The little sweetheart, you know for truth, Who lives for aye in the Land of Youth; Who never dies; who is always fair, With eyes of mischief and tomboy hair: Whom your heart still follows and worships, it seems, Forever and aye in the Land o' Dreams.
The doctor punched my vein The captain called me Cain Upon my belly sat the sow of fear With coins on either eye The President came by And whispered to the braid what none could hear High over where the storm Stood steadfast cruciform The golden eagle sank in wounded wheels White Negroes laughing still Crept fiercely on Brazil Turning the navies upward on their keels Now one by one the trees Stripped to their naked knees To dance upon the heaps of shrunken dead The roof of England fell Great Paris tolled her bell And China staunched her milk and wept for bread No island singly lay But lost its name that day The Ainu dived across the plunging sands From dawn to dawn to dawn King George's birds came on Strafing the tulips from his children's hands Thus in the classic sea Southeast from Thessaly The dynamited mermen washed ashore And tritons dressed in steel Trolled heads with rod and reel And dredged potatoes from the Aegean floor Hot is the sky and green Where Germans have been seen The moon leaks metal on the Atlantic fields Pink boys in birthday shrouds Loop lightly through the clouds Or coast the peaks of Finland on their shields That prophet year by year Lay still but could not hear Where scholars tapped to find his new remains Gog and Magog ate pork In vertical New York And war began next Wednesday on the Danes.
For years I fantasized pain driving, driving me over each threshold I thought I had, till finally the joy in my flesh would break loose with the terrible strain, and undulate in great spasmic circles, centered in cunt and heart.I clung to pain because, as a drunk and desperate boy once said, stumbling from the party into the kitchen and the two women there, &ldquo;Pain is the only reality.&rdquo; I rolled on the linoleum with mirth, too close to his desperation to understand, much less to help.Years of that reality.Pain the link to existence: pinch your own tissue, howl yourself from sleep.But that night was too soon after passion had shocked the marrow alive in my hungry bones.The boy fled from my laughter painfully, and I leaned and touched, leaned and touched you, mesmerized, woman, stunned by the tangible pleasure that gripped my ribs, every time like a caged beast, bewildered by this late, this essential heat.
Anger does this. Wishing the furious wish turns the son into a crow the daughter, a porcupine. Soon enough, no matter how we want them to be happy our little loved ones, no matter how we prod them into our sun that it may shine on them, they whine to stand in the dry-goods store. Fury slams in. The willful fury befalls. Now the varnish-black son in a tree crow the berater, denounces the race of fathers, and the golden daughter all arched bristle and quill leaves scribbles on the tree bark writing how The Nameless One accosted her in the dark. How put an end to this cruel spell? Drop the son from the tree with a rifle. Introduce maggots under his feathers to eat down to the pure bone of boy. In spring when the porcupine comes all stealth and waddle to feed on the willows stun her with one blow of the sledge and the entrapped girl will fly out crying Daddy! or Danny! or is it Darling? and we will live all in bliss for a year and a day until the legitimate rage of parents speeds the lad off this time in the uniform of a toad who spews a contagion of warts while the girl contracts to a spider forced to spin from her midseam the saliva of false repentance. Eventually we get them back. Now they are grown up. They are much like ourselves. They wake mornings beyond cure, not a virgin among them. We are civil to one another. We stand in the kitchen slicing bread, drying spoons, and tuning in to the weather.
No cars go by Where dogs are barking at the desert. Yet it is not twenty years since many lamps Shed their juices in this one time town And stores grew big lights, like oranges and pears. Now not one lame miner Sits on the rotten verandah, Works in the irons where Judas' shadow dwells. Yet I could hew a city From the side of their hill. O deep stone covert where the dusk Is full of lighted beasts And the mad stars preach wars without end: Whose bushes and grasses live without water, There the skinny father of hate rolls in his dust And if the wind should shift one leaf The dead jump up and bark for their ghosts: Their dry bones want our penniless souls. Bones, go back to your baskets. Get your fingers out of my clean skin. Rest in your rainless death until your own souls Come back in the appointed way and sort you out from your remains. We who are still alive will wring a few green blades From the floor of this valley Though ploughs abhor your metal and your clay. Rather than starve with you in rocks without oasis, We will get up and work your loam Until some prayer or some lean sentence Bleeds like the quickest root they ever cut. For we cannot forget the legend of the world's childhood Or the track to the dogwood valley And Adam our Father's old grass farm Wherein they gave the animals names And knew Christ was promised first without scars When all God's larks called out to Him In their wild orchard.
The rose is obsolete but each petal ends in an edge, the double facet cementing the grooved columns of air The edge cuts without cutting meets nothing renews itself in metal or porcelain  whither? It ends  But if it ends the start is begun so that to engage roses becomes a geometry  Sharper, neater, more cutting figured in majolica  the broken plate glazed with a rose Somewhere the sense makes copper roses steel roses  The rose carried weight of love but love is at an end of roses It is at the edge of the petal that love waits Crisp, worked to defeat laboredness fragile plucked, moist, half-raised cold, precise, touching What The place between the petal's edge and the From the petal's edge a line starts that being of steel infinitely fine, infinitely rigid penetrates the Milky Way without contact lifting from it neither hanging nor pushing  The fragility of the flower unbruised penetrates space
Sometimes she calls me Chance and sometimes she calls me Desire. I was coming out of the laundromat wearing my little Graceland hat. What most astounded me on this particular day was the day itself, my being alive against such confusion, my being erect, one could almost say, as opposed to crawling all around the place snakeless, beingless, with no face. Bob Dylan was coming to our tiny town, a big man, having survived so much, and having written it down, and put it to music, why did he bother? About anything? Especially us. It was just his way of doing things. So much the better. And why not us? Of all people? I was the one who got drunk, out of necessity. I missed out on the dinner party, maybe I was some place else. She said: &ldquo;Diminishment of the fauna has me concerned.&rdquo; I said: &ldquo;What?&rdquo; All this dinner party stuff had me ... what is the word... perforated? Perpendicular. I'm perjuring myself because I want to, because of an ever- lasting joy. This is what I call getting things done, well, sort of. I have never been to a concert. What would he say? So now, at last, you are growing up, into a thing thing. We can expect you to do better soon. Your sad times are reason for celebration. Misfit fits right in, like a beautiful stem of something with no flower, no power, just a reaching upward with no end. But Bob Dylan is coming to our town, and we are subcutaneously prepared, that is, our fingernails are on edge.
Eakins looks toward the vivid bridge, The mechanism of his brush and eye Surgical and objective as a lens. The ochres of a Pennsylvania fall Fuzz toward the sky, the moment's poise preserved And justified. The second bridge is red, Deciduous branches bare. Red maple leaves Grip sapless limbs. Mud flattens toward the water Slipping under. By the first bridge a canoe Is red and holds three men; a second scull Moves pocking water with the pull of oars, Its slaps just fading. Mallards fuss and drift, A scull mosquitos by the distant bank. Schmitt drifts back in the vivisected day.
We moved down the valley Past the stalls where the sun horses Champed their bits of gold; and whence Night's murmuring rivers flow Onto the world. Her two legs were beautiful When we paused on the green bed And I lifted her down. She sobbed Once, then her mouth bruised mine; Her hands turned to fire. She made Red flowers on my neck when I took her. At cloud level we ate, The crumbs falling unheeded from our puffed lips. Below us Stretched the unknown lands of sorrow. Men had little wisdom there. They sat In their filth like sick dogs, vomiting up Their food. And they fought that nothing Might be changed. In the image of God. Now that we really see them, the other beings, Our eyes are not strange. Alive! standing just out of reach Beyond where the dead cry. So the challenge! So this destiny Builds pleasure. My wish Is gathered unto the silent breast. My gain Is for all men. My eyes gleam steadily Above this night. The other creatures Come to taste my will. I separate the seeing From the thing seen: my eyes <> The sound of immense wings Beating over their unshadowed hills. Not to be separated from my world ... O walk At my side on these endless heights. Who will? O who will harry the dark At the side of the damned ... Calling to each other across the graves, The beautiful and strong whom Horror eats, whose bones are already Bleached in city deserts, whose stars And moons bestride another world  These, these few, these  They are not drowned by the great white rains Of this winter; they are not trampled By the horses of murder and death; Instead, they try to live above life, As the birds above their flying, As the dead beyond their dying. Leviathan's scales sparkle in the heavens And the whole fish of the universe Turns on the enraptured spit of God. Through the flames I can see the lowered faces Of creatures that watch us in amused love. We live on only one side of the world. As we moved down the valley The petals of the snowflower Dropped gently on all that had been ugly Anywhere on this principal star.
I don't like you today, finally and forever. Before, there was always something about you to claim for amazement and goodness. I always assumed your injury. Because you did not fly I told people you were mending a broken wing. The truth is you cannot fly. Some terror in you keeps you hugging the ground. Like a snake's your eyes are always open guarding your poisons. You imagine thieves who want to steal your skin. You nightmare with open eyes. The day is cool, peaceful, and I walk with nothing to harm you. I do not want to take you home, Sir. You are best left in the wild tasting your full stomach. I only wish to watch, to tell people, our mutual acquaintances, about the patterns of your skin. The truth is you swallowed the bird inside you, so all of you is snake. Eternally serpent. They have come to tell me of your hard, open eyes. What crimes you imagine of me: Lucretia, Lizzie, Lady Macbeth. Mr. Snake in your Snakedom, what fantastic dreams you weave. We are not all made of your skin. We are not all snakes. We do not all lie with poisons. Only the ones who close their eyes to dream can rise.
Large yellow full moon Sets over my shoulder As I run home from Palo Marin in pre-dawn cold On my right the ocean shines Like hot asphalt Moment of inky mystery And mirage Then in the east a Rose Of Sharon saffron-ness sweeps Over Mount Tam whose Sleeping volumes are still Snow-dusted And slowly Overhead the whole bowl Of sky brightens and expands Counter-clockwise
<> To where they say she's waiting for me, dead, Her cold hands on the coverlet outspread, The wan hair matted on her brow. There will be drawn blinds to keep The benison of sunlight from that room, While hypocritic through the flower-hung gloom The curious neighborhood will creep.  The flickering car window gleams Far out upon a waste of rotting field; Long miles of railroad slums have reeled Up from the dark of troubled dreams To speed us onward to that place So desolate, so empty of all cheer, A lower hell by far than holds us here Because its horror frames her face.
All our roads go nowhere. Maps are curled To keep the pavement definitely On the world. All our footsteps, set to make Metric advance, Lapse into arcs in deference To circumstance. All our journeys nearing Space Skirt it with care, Shying at the distances Present in air. Blithely travel-stained and worn, Erect and sure, All our travels go forth, Making down the roads of Earth Endless detour.
My head can lend no succour to my heart because her face is beyond all wonder she is like diamond to glass when her eyelids part their frin- ges of bright gold and when to the lute she sings she makes the nightbird mute gods why do you make us love your goodly gifts and snatch them right away I marvel how the fish do live in the sea but patience gazes on the graves of kings (and mine).
Her parents and her dolls destroyed, her childhood foreclosed, she watched the foreign soldiers from the sunlit window whose black bars Were crooked crosses inked upon her pallid face. &ldquo;Liebchen, Liebchen, you should be in bed.&rdquo; But she felt ill no longer. And because that day was a holy day when even the dead, it seemed, must rise, she was allowed to stay and see the golden strangers who Were Father, Brother, and her dream of God. Afterwards she said, &ldquo;They were so beautiful, and they were not afraid.&rdquo;
After we moved into Mounds and the duplex apartment while father barbered (and then the procession of foster homes courtesy Welfare Department capped at last by the orphanage), she served in white shoes the rich man, owner of a factory stamping steel or weaving baskets made of wire. She tucked his three children in, read them bedtime stories, loved them as her own. And when she came to see us Sundays in the orphanage, she wept and asked that we recall her virtues, how the night we moved the final time, she scrubbed floors till they glowed like glass. Of course we well remembered. She had worked till midnight, on her knees. She showed us snapshots. In one she held rich baby up, beside his carriage while two girls stood in fur coats squinting, darlings, and she was a proud mother again in a uniform, all white as snow. Those Sundays when she left anew we'd run back upstairs, look out to see her walk away, snow-white feet past roses red and blurred inside a circling wall of brick.
There is no river which is called Lethe by the ancients. To forget is to neglect or to refuse to hold on to, to fail to get ... they should put out to sea without being discovered by them ... he protected the murderer unawares it is not unknown to me that some god led thee What remains hidden is also what forgetfulness means, the unnoticed, that which hasn't been seen yet,  concealed ... lest he perish having not known ... lest he perish having not accomplished his end Thou thoughtest to escape the gods' notice in ... to let a thing escape, to forget? that she might bear unknown? to forget purposely, to pass over? He chose to forget? Caught by the leg he went head first through the hole into the darkness where the waters roar &amp; when he came out he needed those who could bathe him back into his memory and his forgetfulness: his wits were sharp enough when he was on sugar &amp; didn't remember all that had happened in the year and a half since he had come in barefoot out of the snowstorm not to hold not to remember not to come by anything got
The ladies in red capes and golden bracelets Walk like reeds and talk like rivers, And sigh, like Vichy water, in the doorways; And looks run down the land like colts, Race with the wind, (the mares, their mothers', lover) Down to the empty harbor. All spine and sandal stand the willow women; They shake their silver bangles In the olive-light of clouds and windows, Talking, among themselves, like violins; And, opening their eyes wide as horizons, Seem to await the navy home from Troy. No longer stand together, widow women! Give your gold ornaments to the poor, Make run the waterspeech of beads between your fingers: For Troy is burned, and Greece is cursed, The plague comes like a cloud. All your men are sleeping in the alien earth, But one. And Clytemnestra, walking like a willow, stares. Beads and bracelets gently knifeclash all about her, Because the conqueror, the homecome hero, The soldier, Agamemnon, Bleeds in her conscience, twisting like a root.
The sun is folding, cars stall and rise beyond the window. The workmen leave the street to the bums and painters' wives pushing their babies home. Those who realize how fitful and indecent consciousness is stare solemnly out on the emptying street. The mourners and soft singers. The liars, and seekers after ridiculous righteousness. All my doubles, and friends, whose mistakes cannot be duplicated by machines, and this is all of our arrogance. Being broke or broken, dribbling at the eyes. Wasted lyricists, and men who have seen their dreams come true, only seconds after they knew those dreams to be horrible conceits and plastic fantasies of gesture and extension, shoulders, hair and tongues distributing misinformation about the nature of understanding. No one is that simple or priggish, to be alone out of spite and grown strong in its practice, mystics in two-pants suits. Our style, and discipline, controlling the method of knowledge. Beatniks, like Bohemians, go calmly out of style. And boys are dying in Mexico, who did not get the word. The lateness of their fabrication: mark their holes with filthy needles. The lust of the world. This will not be news. The simple damning lust, float flat magic in low changing evenings. Shiver your hands in dance. Empty all of me for knowing, and will the danger of identification, Let me sit and go blind in my dreaming and be that dream in purpose and device. A fantasy of defeat, a strong strong man older, but no wiser than the defect of love.
but also dying (as well as to cry and sing, my love and wonder)is something you have and i 've been doing as long as to (yes)forget(and longer dear)our birth's the because of a why but our doom is to grow(remember this my sweet)not only wherever the sun and the stars and the moon are we're;but also nowhere
For rage and dignity no words compare with the Atlantic Ocean lashed by winds; the love-gestures of juveniles are sweeter than any words of mine. But for alcaic speed and in the end a pat surprise you must read Horace. John, the fertile fields and the repetitive factories produce, though many other things, no metaphors. Sure, many a labor is heavier to do and profit by than stanzas, but these are my skill, shall I ungratefully my gift of formal speech disdain? By literature Sheharazad a thousand midnights his prone violence appeased, the homicidal hurry in his soul embarrassed into an uncertain smile.
Turns to her, then,from the northern oriole taking a dustbath. It is her voice unseats him. Yearsit will take to thread himself backinto the dull wood. Two spider bikes leanagainst the Dairy Dream, their shadows, toward evening,an aftertenderness she sees and aches. With children, they growmore involved, more isolate,like grazing animals, vaguely aware of the other. And something small slipsfrom them, murmur rising above a crowd's silenceduring the performance. It is their performance. Like hens they fillrooms with their voices not because the egg,in passing out, hurts them. Because the place has been madeempty within. When they tithe their attention,the thing itself is incomprehensible. They thinkthey have swallowed stones for each other. They thinkthey are blocked by their sacrifices,suffocating in a dark shaft.Who can say they will hit againthat gorgeous galena ore which is emotion,the fact of emotion?
Dear little babe, of all born things alive  Most helpless thou of life a slender thread. Can such as thee so rough a sea survive,  And come at last the way all feet must tread? Yea, by the God whom I adore above,  If I could fix thy destiny by choice Thou wouldst be safe, my little love. 'Tis love ineffable I wrap thee in.  To pitiless pain, and ache, and storm and blast I'd bare my soul to save thy feet from sin,  And bring thee safely home, Lochiel, at last. But in thy chancing boon of birth, thy whole  And everlasting destiny of life Lies in thy self-directing soul.
Poetry glues your soul together Poetry wears dynamite shoes Poetry is the spittle on the mirror Poetry wears nothing but the blues It's the gumboil gargoyle that falls off the cathedral To land on the crown of the Queen. Grab it while you can, it's the magical needle. It's bitter sixteen and its flesh is bright green Poetry glues your soul together Poetry wears dynamite shoes Poetry is the spittle on the mirror Poetry wears nothing but the blues Poetry's a lion on the stage of the opera house Doin' a little jammin' with his brothers and sisters Hits you, slits you, almost never fits you, you and your lover get covered in blisters. Poetry glues your soul together Poetry wears dynamite shoes Poetry is the spittle on the mirror Poetry wears nothing but the blues Poetry's the moon's own bottle of gin. It's the purple ghost of Duke Ellington's band. It's a bucket with a hole for collecting truth in And the legless beggar army of Disneyland Clinton hasn't got it, but there's plenty in Fidel. Slap your sherry trifle on my sewing machine. Bend it into bowlines but you'll never break it The only way to make it is the way you make it Only thing that matters is the way you shake it Poetry glues your soul together Poetry wears dynamite shoes Poetry is the spittle on the mirror Poetry wears nothing but the blues
I'm running down a trail in a park in Pittsburgh thinking of Ti Juan Kidd 15 years old, shot outside a party in Detroit, my hometown. He was laughing and running when a bullet went through his head. November, and the trees bare their black skeletons. Nowhere to hide. Ti Juan was an inner-city athlete with a scholarship to a prep school in Grosse Pointe where people don't shoot each other. He was number 198 shot under age 17, the 20th killing. They keep track in the papers. On my run, I count eight squirrels, one cardinal. I run four miles. These are my numbers. <> I am out of breath. I like his name and his smile in the photo. He looks like someone I would enjoy running and laughing with through this park. I run to make sense of things. I try to make sense of the numbers. Ti Juan Kidd: the red of the cardinal splashes through the trees.
They Ugly on purpose! They get high off Air Raids! They are the oldest continuously functioning Serial Killers! They murder to Explain Themselves! They think Humans are food. They imitate conversation by lying They are always naked and always dirty the shower &amp; tuxedo don't help They go to the bathroom to have a religious experience They believe everything is better Dead. And that everything alive is their enemy. Plus Heathens is armed and dangerous.
Four little girls Who went to Sunday School that day And never came back home at all But left instead Their blood upon the wall With spattered flesh And bloodied Sunday dresses Torn to shreds by dynamite That China made aeons ago  Did not know That what China made Before China was ever Red at all Would redden with their blood This Birmingham-on-Sunday wall. Four tiny girls Who left their blood upon that wall, In little graves today await The dynamite that might ignite The fuse of centuries of Dragon Kings Whose tomorrow sings a hymn The missionaries never taught Chinese In Christian Sunday School To implement the Golden Rule. Four little girls Might be awakened someday soon By songs upon the breeze As yet unfelt among magnolia trees.
Suddenly I'm back all those Saturday nights ago,  dropping in on you as you light each other up  and call for attention only when you call. Your palaver is all Eagle Printing shop talk,  fixing dancing words on the pub's correcting stone  before the whole works is choked and broken up. Now you set the good old days up again, and I,  a printer's devil, pie that dumped stick,  inserting how those times were as foul as today's. You each take a slug, then laugh this spirit off,  ordering me keep my moolah for the dance as you call. I delay heading down Summerhill to the disco's strobes,  scraps, shifts and refusals and stay for just one more with you, forever, in the spoiled good old days.
Young men, don't ride away! Sand  stifled the soul of the last one to disappear and now  he's altogether dumb. To look for him is useless.  (Young men, I never lie.) That lost one now reposes  in a reliable grave. He once rode into me as if  through lands of miracles and fire, with all  the power of poetry, and I was: dry, sandy, without day.  He used poetry to invade my depths, like those of  any other country! Listen to this story of two  souls, without jealousy: we entered one another's eyes  as if they were oases - I took him into me as if he were  a god, in passion, simply because of a charming tremor  in his young throat. Without a name he sank into me. But now  he's gone. Don't search for him. All deserts forget the thousands of  those who sleep in them. And afterwards the Sahara in one  seething collapse will cover you also with sand like sprinkled  foam. And be your hill!
<> Billows that gather your forces and rise To break without foamy crest or roar Under the moonlit skies, Tenuous inlets and still, white bays That engulf and enshroud the hamlets and trees, Is there a longing that guides your ways, You ghosts of inland seas? Haunting the hills with your soft embrace Do you, wraith of a sea, make the mountain's dream That the floods of old have returned to their place Once more to plash and gleam? Silvery mists on abandoned shores Nature, adream at her artistry, Has left the mountains sad no more, With pictured memory.
Nothing has happened yet. The house settles into its stones, unoccupied; the road curves towards something  away from something else. A single elk bends to the lake to drink, or in the confusion of dusk perhaps it is simply an old tree leaning over the water. If there were voices, their language would be expectancy; but the silence is nearly perfect. Even the sun is motionless before it takes that definite plunge into the darkness of the first chapter.
Under the harvest sun the heart ripens on its wall; under the heat of noon the mind like a leaf is cool. The angelus and the goatbell sway across the grass; butterflies in blue mid-air touch and spin apart. Any attempted dream must fall to ruin in this light, must pass before the mocking glance of idle animals. There is no need to escape from the motionless mountain there is no need to escape when here the indifferent lake accepts a nervous image, demands no affirmation of innocence or faith.
Those with our victory in their hands Lift ticking to the final cloud Those instruments with this fate endowed: Hapless a prince in the ground Who to the dawn of wounds has bowed Turns once again that face to us In whose royal hieroglyph we saw The judgement of that fatal law Invoking universal detritus. O far the wall where I have stood And seen the fighting in the air Of such societies as give Mercy and honey to the grave. Move you who walk by crutch and dog To find the city where we lay, Move and look down upon that home Shattered by triumphant day. So at the double drum we stepped And forget where a happy hill Sleeps in our silence. She is here, The red adulteress in the sky. My last infirmity is life The voices from America call, And in its trench the dead beast wails To speak a first and last farewell.
Down my most tangled paths of revery A man with a transistor radio walks. Sweet are thy woods, o solitariness; This stranger with convivial Rock-box gawks In mine. He comes alone, strolls unbefriended, By vibraharps' pubescent plaints attended. Full-ON reception blurs the voice that talks. Surfeit with speech, I'd drink in strength from silence Anonymous in a crowd. But me he stalks, Nor rests to skew my solitariness. Past network's blare all his reception baulks; How could he bear the hush that I intended? Such paucity unended must be ended  Full on my revery's assassin walks.
When a poem has come to me, almost complete as it makes its way into daylight, out through arm, hand, pen, onto page; or needing draft after draft, the increments of change toward itself, what's missing brought to it, grafted into it, trammels of excess peeled away till it can breathe and leave me  then I feel awe at being chosen for the task again; and delight, and the strange and familiar sense of destiny. But when I read or hear a perfect poem, brought into being by someone else, someone perhaps I've never heard of before a poem bringing me pristine visions, music beyond what I thought I could hear, a stirring, a leaping of new anguish, of new hope, a poem trembling with its own vital power  then I'm caught up beyond that isolate awe, that narrow delight, into what singers must feel in a great choir, each with humility and zest partaking of harmonies they combine to make, waves and ripples of music's ocean, who hush to listen when the aria arches above them in halcyon stillness.
In my scraggly stammering I'm an old angler and the water dark with buckbean and water cress gingers my hook like tired women but the bottom is always too deep a meeting too costly and dear: fishing is for the wise and untroubled others (low in their scows) as time has borne out play in a shallow place.
 Dolphin plunge, fountain play.  Fetch me far and far away. Fetch me far my nursery toys, Fetch me far my mother's hand, Fetch me far the painted joys. And when the painted cock shall crow Fetch me far my waking day That I may dance before I go. Fetch me far the breeze in the heat, Fetch me far the curl of the wave, Fetch me far the face in the street. And when the other faces throng Fetch me far a place in the mind Where only truthful things belong. Fetch me far a moon in a tree, Fetch me far a phrase of the wind, Fetch me far the verb To Be. And when the last horn burns the hills Fetch me far one draught of grace To quench my thirst before it kills.  Dolphin plunge, fountain play.  Fetch me far and far away.
I have been warned. It is more than thirty years since I wrote  Thinking of the narrative poems I made, which always Ended in blood and pain, though beautiful enough my pain, my blood, They were my creatures I understood, and wrote to myself: &ldquo;Make sacrifices once a year to magic Horror away from the house&rdquo; for that hangs imminent Over all men and all houses &ldquo;This little house here You have built over the ocean with your own hands Beside the standing sea-boulders ...&rdquo; So I listened To my Demon warning me that evil would come If my work ceased, if I did not make sacrifice Of storied and imagined lives, Tamar and Cawdor And Thurso's wife &ldquo;imagined victims be our redeemers&rdquo;  At that time I was sure of my fates and felt My poems guarding the house, well-made watchdogs Ready to bite. But time sucks out the juice, A man grows old and indolent.
When you thrill with joy At the songs of yesteryear And declare the ditties Of today quite drear  Watch out! You're getting old! When you extoll the solid Virtues of  And pronounce the young folks Of  Uh-huh! You're getting old! Watch Out! Else you won't know what it's All about. Watch Out!
<> The other birds woke all around, Rising with toot and howl they stirred Their plumage, broke the trembling sound, They craned their necks, they fluttered wings, &lsquo;While we are silent no one sings, And while we sing you hush your throat, Or tune your melody to our note.&rsquo; <> The screams and hootings rose again: They gaped with raucous beaks, they whirred Their noisy plumage; small but plain The lonely hidden singer made A well of grief within the glade. &lsquo;Whist, silly fool, be off,&rsquo; they shout, &lsquo;Or we'll come pluck your feathers out.&rsquo; <> Slight and small the lovely cry Came trickling down, but no one heard. Parrot and cuckoo, crow, magpie Jarred horrid notes, the jangling jay Ripped the fine threads of song away, For why should peeping chick aspire To challenge their loud woodland choir? Cried it so sweet that unseen bird? Lovelier could no music be, Clearer than water, soft as curd, Fresh as the blossomed cherry tree. How sang the others all around? Piercing and harsh, a maddening sound, With  <>
No props for once we have you unstaged, ideal genius at forty without wadded-silk dressing-gown, wine-velvet beret, a villa filled with idols. You stare off-camera at what? Here at least there is more than meets the ear cocked, this moment, for Frau Wesendonck's praises and for Cosima's prayers  so much more ardent, at sixteen, than Minna's: a few infidelities will bring far less sorrow than the long-drawn-out disloyalty of desire. What we see is what we dream you must have been, boldly readying yourself for what Baudelaire called the greatest honor a poet can have: to do no more and no less than what he intended. Until your will had been done, the difference between sanity and hysteria, illusion and reality, had always been a matter of time: what was real, what was sane, had always lasted longer only truth was continuous. You would alter that, transform our fears and even our fatigue, you would force time to change shape and by cold legerdemain, from Ortrud to Klingsor, make event, mere happening, into duration, having discovered the center of our every appetite is in its metamorphoses. Wait, though dates conflict, the size of the plate is wrong, and you hated Nadar; for a man just over five feet, could these long shanks be yours? Experts shrug, and we are left with the old dissatisfactions: complete understanding of a dream includes the knowledge that it is one, and such knowledge wakes us up. This is not you.
Freak waves, rollers, tsunami ... tsunami ... Harbour waves. Tidal waves out of the blue they say it happens from time to time. Soon the wave felt heavy, entangled with legs and arms that were too slow  and the fish felt a man flailing against sea weed  It's reported the rock he stood on was 15 metres high, that he was 56 years old, and he stood 13 metres away from the shoreline. But can they make a graph, a sketch, can they find the proper equation? Can they tell us what to do so it won't happen again? Was the sky too blue that day in Ucluelet? How cold was the water? Why did the wave pounce, why take him away so he was never found? Why must such a perfect meditation be rent, rent body and soul through and through so you and I shiver, pull each other nearer to the shore when we walk by the same place.
<> begins to crawl over the house of our two lives  Now that a red curve winds across the shingles  Now that hands washed in early sunrises climb and spill scarlet on a white lattice weave  Now that a loop of blood is written on our roof and reaching around a chimney  How are the two lives of this house to keep strong hands and strong hearts?
Tambourines! Tambourines! Tambourines To the glory of God! Tambourines To glory! A gospel shout And a gospel song: Life is short <> Tambourines! Tambourines! Tambourines To glory!
Brick and mortar for the ghost Slipped between our first and last, That beneficence which came When man called his hearth a home; From a roaming wilderness Cut the mystery of place. Overhead the star-beasts pass This loose gazebo, winter-house, Patched with glass and cockle-shell, Cobbled up with flint and tile, Where the garden guardian Hosts his feather, fur and fin, And, as coloured lights go down, Glazing rime upon the green, As the winds blow colder through Spaces leaded bough by bough, Keeps at this dark terminus The empty nest, the chrysalis.
Dynamite black girl fucking in the halls skirt pulled up climbing cross the walls Dynamite black girl in her dreams, in her motions, in her pulldown hat sticks out her lip asks me where I'm at Dynamite black girl, walks in the snow meets me in the city walks with me stares at me touches me talks and talks to me kisses me makes love we said awhile back Dynamite black girl swingin in the halls the world cant beat you and my slaps are love
Somebody's father hangs on the wall, his mackinaw falling apart in the closet. He will not come for it again; his wife says they can go to hell before she comes after it. She went to high school with the lady that owns the place, even then everybody knew what she was. Candy store my ass. So when she sees the coat pass by on the drunken young man's back she bites her tongue and watches TV until the last announcer comes. She asks him can't she eat something, she is so hungry. And like everybody else he nods his head into the dark toward the candy store, so she says candy store my ass, and tightens her belt.
Velvet sulphur powder puffs, and cream And lavender arrangements trimmed with ice, Little chandeliers and pulsing lanterns, Lipstick streaks, and ermined eyes of gin Shaken in cut glass, and sleighs of Roman Stripes, and azure mirrors under skin, Bones like silk embedded in a crystal, Armor made of mica, gilded wine Strung like buoys along a throbbing wire, Snows collecting into white jade bulges, Milktails of successive pale blue arches Stippling into gray, G-clef signs Descending slowly on their licorice threading  Glass and waterglass, rain on rain.
I want you to plunge into my life as if you were diving into a deep pool in the sealet nothing be hidden from youhold your breath and swim underwater to explore every crevice in the rock and the coralmake your way through the undersea vegetation question- ing the strange creatures which you may encounterlet the fish gossip with you about meques- tion the giant squid and the poisonous sting raythey can tell you much about me (some of which you may not like to hear) let nothing be hiddenyou must know me as I was before you came.
Above Perth in King's Park near the lit-up obelisk with names of the war dead a great karri log lies on blocks, a tribute to the logging industry of Australia. The single log is nearly three hundred feet long and six feet thick and it's a wonder how it was hauled out of its forest. By no means the largest, the bronze plaque assures. &ldquo;And what's it used for?&rdquo; I asked, this hardest and best of all woods  nearly extinct now. &ldquo;Toilet paper,&rdquo; answers my guide. &ldquo;Most of it goes to Japan as chips. For toilet paper.&rdquo; Next day I grieve not the war dead, flowers still left for them over three score and ten years after their war. But the logs I mourn the Gullivers men climb and crawl upon and haul out of the forest that we and the Japanese may wipe our asses smooth.
Through light so nursery-bright on a playing field, Soup-tin red, sea blue when the sea was really, Greens of the good for you or a game played fair, She walked with a smile between the deliberate rings Of the cross good children shyly ignoring her. Her young black hair was tied back in a headscarf; She looked ahead at the houses, though her eyes Were dark and distant with remembered hymns Begun inside. She was believed by it all, Now weekdays whirled and the news of a boy or a girl Joked in her brilliant blood.     And the glamorous cars In glossy maroons and greens and stripes went by, And smokers born in a blanket in a grey war Bought rainbow-shimmering records and sportsman cards, Bright paperbacks with jazzily slanting words, Chewed and swore with a grin then stared all around At the light all cherry colour.     The whole world over Nations hastily, scrappily, sulkily born Pretended they'd been sitting there, honest, forever, And every oblivious woman and innocent man Glanced up from the work in hand on the world's one town  Verges, roses, pinning up, setting out, hosing down, Whatever. Time began.
Before the Ark on Ararat a lodgment found, The Elsmeres dwelt in clouds of doubt and fear; And, still, when Time has reached its closing year, That doubt and fear the future's sky will bound. No faith can make the hidden mysteries clear That shroud the glories of the Eden where Our hopes, through all the ages, circle 'round, Like ships at anchor in a haven fair. We fondly deem we know from whence we came, And to what destiny at last shall go, When vanish all of pomp and power and fame; But, reason as we will, we do not know!  And, so, like Elsmere, many pine and die,  Victims of life's remorseless whence and why.
I know that I shall meet my fate Somewhere among the clouds above; Those that I fight I do not hate, Those that I guard I do not love; My country is Kiltartan Cross, My countrymen Kiltartan's poor, No likely end could bring them loss Or leave them happier than before. Nor law, nor duty bade me fight, Nor public men, nor cheering crowds, A lonely impulse of delight Drove to this tumult in the clouds; I balanced all, brought all to mind, The years to come seemed waste of breath, A waste of breath the years behind In balance with this life, this death.
A row of brownstone buildings  houses of the well-to-do years ago  in a quiet neighborhood. Now empty: windows with venetian blinds at crazy angles; window after window broken, showing teeth of glass at the passers-by. Suddenly a door opens and an angry old man is sweeping a cloud of dust along the dim hallway upon us. Excuse me, sir, are you Father Time?
Egrit, old by then. A leg I'd never loved was gone. I walked with a stave of thorn, proud of my understanding. Tales were told in the hall. I knew them as I knew the land, its old light hills. I did not listen when they talked of miracles. As if the child could live and die again. We'd set a stone. I knew I'd not walk properly again and I'd the vegetables. Women without children, wild and thin and clothed in brown. Nothing about them but walking. In my bones I felt for them and further on, where the old road makes an unexpected turn, they sat down. Slept. One set her staff beside her in the ground. It, while she slept, took root, as if it woke, was budded. They walked on. And then we'd a tree of our own and such and such a one already cured, they said. An odd word, miracle. I looked to my own stave. Thorn. I thought it would not, when the wild March wind came on, flower white again.
No notice in the papers: a cold voice over the telephone saying she was dead. Somebody whispered, &ldquo;Syphilis,&rdquo; a sentimental lie. Somebody said, &ldquo;She was rococo, a Florentine olive tree cut down and stripped beneath the body of a football-captain-stock-broker asleep upon Miami sands.&rdquo; &ldquo;She shrieked at poverty. Divorced from silk, furs, and patented nickel-plated limousines.&rdquo; She loved unsought, relaxed security drifting to bed with men as though they were exotic dreams. &ldquo;Damn Marie, you should have gone out like a row of mazda lamps smashed with a crowbar.&rdquo; These were the legends. The facts are these: (true enough for a beautiful girl who held a glimpse of midnight in her hair) I saw her pacing with unforgettable ease down Michigan Boulevard one autumn morning. She died in Lesbian serenity neither hot nor cold until the chaste limbs stiffened. Disconnect the telephone. Cut the wires.
He was here, 1817 August 23rd and seen by all involved including scientists from the Linnaean Society, Cambridge  drawings exist of his appearance August 14th as well (by Captain John Beach a dark brown snake sailing around Ten Pound Island not like a common snake but a caterpillar and when he chose he settled directly like a rock How fast did it move? Faster than any whale  a mile or more in three minutes What were its color, length and thickness? Most say brown; two and a half feet thick size of a man's body Once 200 were watching at one time And it went, very rapidly northeast on August 28th Several feet of tongue, resembling a fisherman's harpoon it threw out several times, perpendicularly, and let it fall again. The head? Rounded like a dog's
I did not know Love had settled down on me: He came like a sea-gull, sinking with uplifted wings down on a  slow-breathing sea, And hardly disturbing wavering shimmer Of sunset, but merging unnoticed into the rosy glimmer. It settled so softly I was all unaware, And the flush faded and it came dark; I slept, still ignorant love was  there, Till a dream came trembling through my flesh in the night And I woke, wondering who touched me with such fear and delight. With the first dawn I rose to look in the glass And I started with pleasure, for in the night it had come to pass That the time-threads spun across my face Had been woven into a glorious mesh, like a bridal lace. I have a charm like laughter through a veil, Like a girl's tinkling merriment at night when the sea is pale; My heart has a warmth like this sea where the dawn Has strewn myriad twinkling poppy-petals down the path of a love  late born. All these glittering sea-birds wheel and fret Below me, complaining that never, never yet Has the warmth of a night kiss spread through their blood Sending them rioting at dawn down the lane of scarlet poppy petals  strewn across the flood.
Afloat between lives and stale truths, he realizes he's never truly protected one soul, they all die anyway, and what good is solace, solace is cheap. The signs are clear: the drooping wings, the shameless thinking about utility and self. It's time to stop. The guardian angel lives for a month with other angels, sings the angelic songs, is reminded that he doesn't have a human choice. The angel of love lies down with him, and loving restores to him his pure heart. Yet how hard it is to descend into sadness once more. When the poor are evicted, he stands between them and the bank, but the bank sees nothing in its way. When the meek are overpowered he's there, the thin air through which they fall. Without effect he keeps getting in the way of insults. He keeps wrapping his wings around those in the cold. Even his lamentations are unheard, though now, in for the long haul, trying to live beyond despair, he believes, he needs to believe everything he does takes root, hums beneath the surfaces of the world.
I scratch a gap in the curtains: the darkest morning of the year goes grey slowly, chains of orange street-lights lose out east in Glasgow's haze. The smell of cigarette smoke fills the bedroom. I drown in it, I gulp you through my lungs again and hardly find what can be breathed. Are you destroying me? Or is it a comedy? To get together naked in bed, was that all? To say you had done it? And that we did nothing was what you had done. Iago and Cassio had a better night. It must be a laugh to see us both washed out with lying there. It doesn't feel like laughing, though, it feels like gasping, shrieking, tearing, all in silence as I leave your long curved back and go through to the kettle and the eggs.
Together by bright water We sat, my love and I. Light as a skimming swallow The perfect hour went by With words like ripples breaking On full thoughts softly waking; With thoughts so dear and shy That no word dared to follow. Down by that sunny water The spring's sweet voice we heard. The wind, the leaves' young lover, My love's hair gently stirred. An hour ago we parted; I wander heavy-hearted. Heavily, like a wounded bird, The day lags, night draws over.
The eye I look out of or hands I use, feet walking, they stay particular. I wanted one place to be where I was always. I wanted you somehow equal, <> I speak with that body. But then it happens  another time, a particular circumstance surrounded by such a distance. You took my heart which was with you, you took my hands which I used for you. Oh when regrets stop and the silence comes back to be a place still for us, our bodies will tell their own story, past all error, come back to us.
The history of the cosmos is the history of the struggle of becoming. When the dim flux of unformed life struggled, convulsed back and forth upon itself, and broke at last into light and dark came into existence as light, came into existence as cold shadow then every atom of the cosmos trembled with delight. Behold, God is born! He is bright light! He is pitch dark and cold! And in the great struggle of intangible chaos when, at a certain point, a drop of water began to drip downwards and a breath of vapour began to wreathe up Lo again the shudder of bliss through all the atoms! Oh, God is born! Behold, He is born wet! Look, He hath movement upward! He spirals! And so, in the great aeons of accomplishment and d&eacute; b&acirc;cle from time to time the wild crying of every electron: Lo! God is born! When sapphires cooled out of molten chaos: See, God is born! He is blue, he is deep blue, he is forever blue! When gold lay shining threading the cooled-off rock: God is born! God is born! bright yellow and ductile He is born. When the little eggy amoeba emerged out of foam and nowhere then all the electrons held their breath: Ach! Ach! Now indeed God is born! He twinkles within. When from a world of mosses and of ferns at last the narcissus lifted a tuft of five-point stars and dangled them in the atmosphere, then every molecule of creation jumped and clapped its hands: God is born! God is born perfumed and dangling and with a little cup! Throughout the aeons, as the lizard swirls his tail finer than water, as the peacock turns to the sun, and could not be more splendid, as the leopard smites the small calf with a spangled paw, perfect. the universe trembles: God is born! God is here! And when at last man stood on two legs and wondered, then there was a hush of suspense at the core of every electron: Behold, now very God is born! God Himself is born! And so we see, God is not until he is born. And also we see there is no end to the birth of God.
A roof of rattling girders shook when a man's wooden wagon rolled across the rotten planks. He held long leather reins, sat high behind two mules. Cotton flew behind him, fell on the road of red baked earth. Another mile and they threw down their wagonload to join a hill that might have been steep slopes of snow, all that had come of a valley full of men dragging burlap bags along to pluck white blossoms from bronze pods that opened in the sun. It was not a life for a man to long endure, to leave at dawn a shack set up on four squared stones, to beg the earth all day for more to curse than give thanks for. The man gave up one day, left all behind, with floods, mules, wet-eyed woman, boy who'd sat so proud behind him then. He began an odyssey, towns where whores bent to kiss his knuckles raw from shovelling smelter fires, when nurse, cashier, or waitress left, he pulled a cotton string tied to the post of his black iron bed and brought the darkness on. Outside, in moonlight nothing grew but tar.
<> But sweet seemed the rest to the weary head, The hands were calmly laid to rest O'er the pulseless bosom and painless breast, The lips are silent and closely sealed, The love of the Saviour, her smile revealed; The weary feet that so often trod Rough ways that led to the throne of God, They tire no more, but forever are still; They've reached the summit of Zion's hill! Thrice had she come to the river before  The boatman tarried to take her o'er, But the voice of loved ones raised in prayer, Prevailed with the Master her life to spare; Then through life's day she gladly gleaned, For the dear Saviour on whom she leaned  A cup of cold water, or binding a wound, Samaritan-like she was always found. Her labors are ended, her trials are o'er, Her soul has flown to the golden shore, Where saints are rejoicing in white robes dressed, And star-decked crowns on their brows are pressed. Yes, she has passed on to the glory-land, And bearing the sheaves she has gleaned in her hand; The conflict is ended, her victory complete, She cast her crown now at the Lord Christ's feet.
Twenty days between pictures, beard grown in, back turned, her husband builds things in the garage. The electric saw shrieks through the split wood. The scream cuts off the familiar voices inside the house, the dull buzz of scenes: kitchen to living room to bedroom  where the bed is neatly made though the child's pick-up sticks stay scattered on the rug. Then a voice on the phone hopes they can negotiate. Hopes he will take a flight to some city where he will become somebody fantastically competent  say the pilot of a spacecraft, or maybe someone sympathetic, the average joe in denim jacket, you know, the typical guy left alone to raise four kids? Wardrobe will call. And she will replay the saw bearing down on the awl-worked juncture, the instant, bedside, when the phone rings and the wood falls free of the serrate blade. In the wake: shocked dust, her jagged call carrying through the walls of all that is unactable.
<> Caressed your hair while someone played Ravel, You need not think by that one tender sight I shall be swept into the usual hell. Because you have, as anyone can see, Strength for your sire and beauty for your dam, You need not look my way, you need not be So insolently sure of what I am. From your variety of autumn fires, I fear you lack experience of ice In delicate and many-colored spires That lie not in your power to entice; And there are reasons you were vain to seek Why one may be a virgin and a Greek.
There were few animals when I was young. The family album shows a couple of dogs, But they were before my time. I don't recall A cat or a guinea pig or blown-up frogs. A horse, it's true, was brought round one hot day. In its sweat-sweet flank a vein like a severed worm Twitched and twitched. Leather smelt male as musk. I would not mount. The groom led the nag away. Upstairs all that sulky close-drawn afternoon I clutched a patched-up elephant to my chest, Blabbed to a leaking cat, pestered a dog That couldn't bark. Then, bored with nothing, dressed, Crept down in the lull before the men return  Mother martyred, wondering what she'd got, My brother shy of my shame and wolfed my cake. Animal sense, some take such an age to learn!
The dog begs to go out then whines immediately to come back in again. It must be twenty-five below a fine snow sifts down from off the roof somewhere glittering, alive almost ... a blizzard of tiny fish or phosphorescent plankton all hypnotized no doubt by the backdoor porchlight. The crabapple, the lilacs so still, so intricate look likewise submarine  rare black corals maybe or arborescent lesions deep within the brain ... It's after six o'clock. And on the next block at some impossible depth where imagination falters an ordinary snow shovel scrapes its way along through frozen drifts of tiny skeletons, muck, blind, anaerobic worms  charm bracelets, shoes the dead, literal snow where the world escapes its proper metaphor and one's only child simply misses her supper forever and ever.
Only a few faint elements of order hint in the yellow of the mask Not shapes, dimensions or measurability in the yellow of the mask What regional quanta shall be atomized in the yellow of the mask God does not travel in the yellow of the mask I am not divisible in the yellow of the mask The mutual perspectives which any such subdivision brings into real effectiveness in the yellow of the mask
Afterglow goldens the peak its rock beak glows like raw blood and red red is the snowfield beneath it inevitably my thoughts go to Christ's blood which our weakness drinks and to the blood of another useless hope- less war then from its blackness the heart cries to the peak O give us a sign make us a sign but back to our valley comes only the sun's dying glow as so softly so delicately the bright rock and snow fade into night and night clouds fold dark on the stars.
In the cold shed sharpening saws. a swallow's nest hangs by the door setting rakers in sunlight falling from meadow through doorframe swallows flit under the eaves. Grinding the falling axe sharp for the summer a swallow shooting out over. over the river, snow on low hills sharpening wedges for splitting. Beyond the low hills, white mountains and now snow is melting.sharpening tools; pack horses grazing new grass bright axes and swallows fly in to my shed.
Some of my friends have all The luck when it comes to Dreams. They have such a variety Of wonderful, exciting dreams: Dreams about sexy mysterious Girls; dreams about stupendous Meals in Parisian restaurants: Mystical dreams that can be Interpreted in interesting ways. I have only one dream that is Always the same. I'm lost in A huge foreign city where I've Never been. I'm afraid I'm Going to miss an important Appointment if I can't find My way. Someone very important But I can't remember his name. There are people in the streets But they don't speak English. I get frightened. I begin to Run from street to street. I Run faster and faster till I Wake up. Where is that city?
Seek out the far capillaries for instance in the fingers where through skin you flush with color you can touch the other universe that reaches out its hand to sample yours. Think how the blood cell in its passage thinks past and future what for us is present, faintly conscious of its movement down this arm. All its times are now. So I sit in a white room at noon knowing that no one can escape me. It is a matter of defining love so that time itself takes cognizance and sings through my weariness and loss <>
Into a land of rhythms you had slipped  Sounds of weathers, songs without words, Mercurial trees and multi-throated birds  Floated as cloud with other lilting clouds. Merely the animal noises of your blood, The blue-grey shallows of tobacco smoke? Startled, you asked at once when you awoke: What did it mean, then, what moral for men? Someone else has stepped in there, While you were where? were elsewhere: Well-chosen words to sway against or for, Conventional and nuclear, peace and war. And you, confused by fading rhythms, Other-worldly weathers, occult accords and schisms, Would prove for either side a slippery satellite.
Reality is being harsh again in David Craig's old office: upon a copy of  with the contents on its cover, beneath the title &lsquo;Satire The New Revolt?&rsquo; and beside the discussion topic &lsquo;What is Jazz?&rsquo; lies a dead fly on its back with its legs drawn together like a man's fingers when he's trying to evaluate something it's hard to reduce to a quantity. It is a shrewd gesticulation, like the copse of trees protruding from Millbuies' brim, that Victorian loch outside Elgin where I used to walk with Izzie strapped to my belly, six months old and being shown the sights I knew she would not remember. They'd flooded the valley for the trout fishers' sake, and now those trees were leafless digits like the hand of Daphne, trying to gauge the world she was losing in the instance of deliverance. It's like the old word cromag, which I try to teach my daughter now to use to mean a pinch of something gathered thus, between the prints of her fingers  and I don't know if it will stick or slip, lie in monumental abandonment beneath the surface of her idiolect like a fly with thirty-foot wings lying on its back beneath the waters of the loch.
My father brought the emigrant bundle of desperation and worn threads, that in anxiety as he stumbles tumble out distractedly; while I am bedded upon soft green money that grows like grass. Thus, between my father who lives on a bed of anguish for his daily bread, and I who tear money at leisure by the roots, where I lie in sun or shade, a vast continent of breezes, storms to him, shadows, darkness to him, small lakes, difficult channels to him, and hills, mountains to him, lie between us. My father comes of a hell where bread and man have been kneaded and baked together. You have heard the scream as the knife fell; while I have slept as guns pounded on the shore.
When no one listens To the quiet trees When no one notices The sun in the pool Where no one feels The first drop of rain Or sees the last star Or hails the first morning Of a giant world Where peace begins And rages end: One bird sits still Watching the work of God: One turning leaf, Two falling blossoms, Ten circles upon the pond. One cloud upon the hillside, Two shadows in the valley And the light strikes home. Now dawn commands the capture Of the tallest fortune, The surrender Of no less marvelous prize! Closer and clearer Than any wordy master, Thou inward Stranger Whom I have never seen, Deeper and cleaner Than the clamorous ocean, Seize up my silence Hold me in Thy Hand! Now act is waste And suffering undone Laws become prodigals Limits are torn down For envy has no property And passion is none. Look, the vast Light stands still Our cleanest Light is One!
Resolving autumn, and by Rhine flood vine-hung bunkers kneel among shore ripples.  Lather and branch lash, white tail tuft Where the hunter, still and then leaping, is renewed bloodrush paced by the ever-valving and shuttering deep iris.  Quarried companionship, pursued gift Justice with headsman's axe slides among shades of justice with sashed gaze and all-bearing shoulders.  String longing for the shaft Ravenous paws of the maples scooping, cuffing at the chance wing, arrows from the water, quarry from the heart.  No rehearsals, the act has begun, is swift Spot weld by the missile caught side-on running, there is no leakage of the message fused by flesh into mind,  A value fugitive and feeding, the dripping pike gaffed spending itself in the breech nova, the shell empties so that emptiness may take hold in matter's long wall.  Cliff its seam, vein its rift Variations in the constancy of union recalibrated where ten arcs crossed and the bronze rested,  The gone heft gaining weightlessness but thrust beyond motion at one flicker by the meaning no beast anticipates and no man does not.  weightlessness at the top of its loft Bronze edge, lead ball, steel borer and splayer, heart's harrier, shall you weave coats from the storm to cover a stranger made welcome?  Hammer, stone, eye and eye, warp, weft But the last miniscules I cannot make out, the great hand hurried them, O Father I am small, and through long watching may grow, but not larger.
<> Before night comes on, A room is a dreary place And forlorn. I will light the tiny flame So it sputter brightly, For ghosts of lonely things Trouble me nightly. I will shut my ears Lest I hear again Wind crying in the hall, Rain on the pane. I will light my candle Before night comes on, A room is a dreary place  Now love has gone.
the end glass eyebrow for company only an eyebrow misses you The Shugborough sign has seen me go South East, has seen me head South West and to the coast. The Shugborough sign has seen me as the least important person, seen me as the most and on some trips I turn to it and boast. the end an eyebrow where I draw the line Some people never see the Shugborough sign. They pass it half asleep or in a daze. No one has claimed it so it must be mine <> <> Drivers have hurtled past the white and brown Shugborough sign and passengers have dozed, while I have passed the A-road to your town, many a time, pretending it was closed or not a possibility that it went wrong the motorways to you Negotiate the fairest deal you can although it might mean pulling punks from trees. Those of us searching for a Shugborough man request a motorway extension, please. So bless so bless the Shugborough sign and praise even the signs you may not understand. You see them by the sides of motorways but can't imagine what they might have planned: a parrot as a substitute for words, a festival assistant with a sneer fluttering slowly to a world of birds. The Shugborough man has missed another year, but he is coming just as you were not, and meanwhile life goes on and plastic trays bring all-day brunches and the weather's hot only an eyebrow misses you
Robin watches the voice rise, rise like a kite from the girl, rise and tangle in the streamers above. She laughs and claps her hands. Slow Robin, rocking in her folding chair, white-haired Robin staring at me with that one wild eye, and flapping her arms as if to fly above us all the principal with his limp toupee, the boy knocking spit from his French horn, the black-capped conductor and her ivory cane. Heap damp flowers on the stage! A sadness sweet as cinnamon hangs in the air. We will not be here next year to watch the scrubbed and licked, milk-bathed children gleam under the streamers and the lights as they sing to the sleeping Brother:  <> fit to kill, and God, God is always waiting for the slow Slow Robin, Slow John, the milky sunlit slowness of childhood   O dear dead Brother, rocking on the earth's dark waves, angels and swans fanning your bones, I slept one afternoon by your stone while sheep grazed under the old oak such a sleep, heady with the scent of jasmine and heat, with the cicadas' spiralling hum, such a sleep as you must sleep, sung in by children and circled with small feet.  <> its golden chains as the floral curtain starts to fall over a frail girl in a faded uniform fighting the last notes from her tarnished flute, over a boy who clicks his heels and cocks his head like our bull calf, Moses, tender and wild over Robin rocking the child she will never have.  Dear dead Brother, hammocked the world over in the cupped palms of a thousand, thousand, balm-carrying voices, why should you wake? Sleep. Sleep. The world will wait.
<> <> Can I say it, and not seem to taunt all who live in torment? Believe it, yet remain aware of the world's anguish? But it's so: a caravan arrives constantly out of desert dust, laden with gift beyond gift, beyond reason. Item: a yellow tulip opens; at its center a star of greenish indigo, a subtle wash of ink at the base of each of six large petals. The black stamens are dotted with white. At the core, the ovary, applegreen fullness tapering to proffer sheltered in the wide cup of primary yellow its triune stigma, clove of green and gold. That's one, at nightfall of a day which brought a dozen treasures, exotic surprises, landscapes, music, words, acts of friendship, all of them wrapped in mysterious silk, each unique. How is it possible? <> <> <>
God, the rabbis tell us, never assigns exalted office to a man until He has tested his mettle in small things. So it is written in the Midrash that when a lamb escaped the flock Moses overtook it at a brook drinking its fill and said, I would have taken thee in my arms and carried thee thither had I known thy thirst whereupon a Heavenly Voice warmly resounded,  Divine election's scary. The burning bush might have been brightened by St. Elmo's fire according to  <> scrub growth close-cropped by tough horned herds of Jacob's sheep (now prized as an heirloom breed) lack treetops, mountain peaks or spires that might discharge electrical ghost-plumes. St. Elmo's seems less science than the desire of modern exegetes to damp the flame. I like my Bible tales, like Scotch, straight up, incontrovertible as Dante's trip through seven circles, Milton's map of Paradise or Homer's wine-dark epic. On such a stage there falls a scrim between text and critique where bursts of light may crack and dance as if on masts of sailing ships and heavenly voices leap from alp to plain. In Sunday School I shivered at God's command: <> and lay awake in the hot clutch of faith yearning yet fearful that the Lord might speak to me in my bed or naked in my bath. I didn't know how little risk I ran of being asked to set my people free from fording some metaphorical Red Sea with a new-sprung Pharaoh raging at my back. I didn't know the patriarchy that spared me fame had named me chattel, handmaiden. God's Angels looked me over but flew by. I like to think God's talent scouts today select for covenant without regard for gender, reinterpreting The Word so that holy detectives glossing the bush (most likely wild acacia), scholars of J E and P deciphering Exodus will fruitfully research the several ways divine authentication lights up truth. Fragments of it, cryptic, fugitive still spark the synapses that let us live.
F is for foetus(a punkslapping mobsucking gravypissing poppa but who just couldn't help it no matter how hard he never tried)the great pink superme diocri ty of a hyperhypocritical D mocra c(sing down with the fascist beast boom boom)two eyes for an eye four teeth for a tooth (and the wholly babble open at blessed are the peacemuckers) &dollar; &dollar; &dollar; etc(as the boodle's bent is the crowd inclined it's freedom from freedom the common man wants) honey swoRkey mollypants
Barking. Just a barking up. Sleeves of a vine. Treeing rain from tabloids of shade. She beats the hound dog with rhythms. Sends indebted pleas of her church up through barks. Climbing sleeves. Messes a round tongues. Planting roots in speech. Messes a round chaos/setting limits out in my eyes. Barking. Just a barking up. Sleeves of a vine. Solitary. Clinging to a limb of hope. My grand father left my will in. She throws a howl up through a hound dog. Barking. Just a barking and it multiplies limbs. For vines. She exists: barking. Just a barking up sleeves of survival. And I climb down from my name screamed on pages of leaves. Crying her lasting sense of speech.
It is as if imperial trumpets broke  Again the silence on War's iron height;  And C&aelig;sar's armored legions marched to fight, While Rome, blood-red upon her mountain-yoke, Blazed like an awful sunset. At a stroke,  Again I see the living torches light  The horrible revels, and the bloated, white, Bayed brow of Nero smiling through the smoke: And here and there a little band of slaves  Among dark ruins; and the form of Paul,  Bearded and gaunt, expounding still the Word: And towards the North the tottering architraves  Of empire; and, wild-waving over all,  The flaming figure of a Gothic sword.
First come the winds then the driving rain with its thousands of dull knives hacking the grey houses where children stop pretending Monopoly is worth playing and stare at the roof. After this the rain moves on, the reeds stand up very still in the marsh as if they might hear by trying as hard as they can something other than what they know. Finally the winds come again, from a different maddening direction, bringing the chill that slices the heads from the flowers and breaks the backs of the reeds. On the roofs the steel cocks spin hysterically and wail the name of a boat.
With no wind blowing It sifts gently down, Enclosing my world in A cool white down, A tenderness of snowing. It falls and falls like sleep Till wakeful eyes can close On all the waste and loss As peace comes in and flows, Snow-dreaming what I keep. Silence assumes the air And the five senses all Are wafted on the fall To somewhere magical Beyond hope and despair. There is nothing to do But drift now, more or less On some great lovingness, On something that does bless, The silent, tender snow.
Children take longer to die where sea hooks blue behind the headland and the hooked dock longs for the next boat. We will live there soon. The headless specter moans the music all moan dispossessed. Montana wants to be warmer and forget how many farmed too hard and failed. Most of all, here we want the self discarded left unresurrected and wind resolved to move on. There, we'll welcome both wind and dead air. Look how hayricks though erect in rows can't be soldiers and sky fights to stay blue. To be old and charming as those fields we must survive sad moments, must go on ploughing after the invaders sail, all we love left broken or dead: lamb, hut and barbarians' wake. No sense waiting on the shore, fresh bread, fresh tears. They're not coming back. April and our snow hangs on. Whatever's delaying spring rides high in arctic currents and can't be controlled or explained. In this shot of Uig, we can see all cause is local, all effect. When we ask the way to Loch Sianta, even if we've stopped the water horse returned to terrorize the village, when he sees we're foreign he'll put on his crofter's face and where he points that will really be the trail.
when I look into the fragile faces of those I love, I long to be one of those people who skate over the surface of their lives, scoring the ice with patterns of their own making, people who have no children, who are attached to earth only by silver blades moving at high speed, who have learned to use the medium of the cold to dance in.
Where to, Doc? Oh, I know that address, know the very house  You're not near as pretty as my last fare I took there, a real sweetheart. That was day before yesterday. Yesterday, I was slowing down for this light, right here at this corner, I hit a kid heard him thud against my right front fender, looked up to see him fall, seemed like under the wheel, felt a bump. My God, I jammed the brakes, jumped out of the cab, ran around to see what happened, take the kid to a hospital, my heart's in my mouth. Yeah, you can bet I felt rotten. So while I'm running around in front of the cab, the kid's partner leaps into the back seat, holds a knife to my fare and takes off with his wristwatch and wallet. When he sees me coming the kid in the street is already on his feet pushing through the crowd on the sidewalk a lot of help  and runs off to find his pal. Run over? Like hell run over, jammed a hunk of board under the wheel as he ducked to make me think I'd broke his leg. Wish to hell I'd a broke his leg for real. You can bet my fare was pretty steamed and so was I, after we spent half the afternoon at the station giving descriptions, looking at mug shots, not picking up any dough doing that either. Between them those two little bastards got over a hundred bucks and a hot watch and neither a day over thirteen. What a town. I bet you see a lot, going around to your patients, eh, Doc? You must go all over town. No? Nothing ever happens? Well, you're a lucky fellow. This place is a jungle, believe me. That's two bucks forty for this ride.
I was with some friends when I noticed with some strangers One of the Gang. And we rose like we'd won awards, Reluctant and delighted, to a position Halfway between our tables, and began, Began with a tale of now and ourselves, but soon Were hurrying back in the years like children yelled Out of the light of their inexplicable game, Into the brooding houses to be held. Nothing's changed, we said, since everything had. Again some time, we agreed, as it never would. When I sipped and caught him searching my eyes for the kind I was, he caught me searching his for the same. Though my new friends and his, from time to time, Would look across and point out a seat in the ring For either stranger, no, we remained right there, Steadily finishing off what was there to be said, Drinking and putting our tankards down slowly. And when there was nothing listing the names like somehow They'd be around us. the Gang, like the night there was no one Missing. Weren't we over there by the window? I'd seen some, but he'd seen two I expected Never to see again, they were fine, they were fine, He mentioned, and that was that.     I returned to my circle, Shaking him off as doubtless he shook me off, Answering who he was with an oh someone, Settling to the night, uncomfortable, gruff, And feeling about as young as the night is young, And wanting it all, like one who has had enough. You don't forgive what's left of what you loved.
It's not you, this dead long moan from the past, the whip coiled, not just for display but to fit tight in the case. No guard. No guide. You want to feel a shudder down your neck but the mural is bad, Serbs tearing Turk horsemen down, Turk swords flashing, faces screaming louder than any face screams and softer than April outside in Belgrade where for all the good good weather and government bring seasons must go on and someone rule. These momentos seem ancient. Seem recent. The woman who brought the key babbled in Serb though her face was dark Turk and her eyes flashed a far different smile than her teeth. And you, alone inside where few tourists come, you guess the anguish where mace and chain seem nothing more than old metal. You might have found them yourself, some afternoon in those pits where you played. You killed the villain. The girl didn't care. You hear of anguish. One village nearby, the Germans shot every male dead in front of mothers and wives. The count: 7,000. The reason: one captain sniped. Doesn't that go back further, gratuitous blows and always the radio on, the indifferent tune? You scanned the dial days and found no comedian. You will feel nothing in time. And you can listen like a hungry dog and not hear the women who cry &lsquo;come back&rsquo; every day at the meadow. Sweet grim people, some days it hurts, this way we ought to feel and cannot, this volume of grief that crawls down the ages dissonant in its demand. A Turk whip is no grain of sand. That cry for help in the night fell short of the seawall where you danced and lectured the tide. You'll remember dull brown this museum's dominant color and maybe the skin of that woman who waits in the house next door to lock up after you leave. Don't come back. Peasants are free and still peasants. The soil's too rocky to farm. You gather from some skirmish now going on, the Turks are ferocious as ever. And if inside you a fist waits to beat back the bad man you are that hand opens in hunger. The market opens and peasants start eating. Not well. Just staying alive. You're armed with local coin. Buy whatever hunger looks good on the stand.
hush) noones are coming out in the gloam ing together are standing together un der a particular tree are all breathing bright darkness to gether are slowly all together very magically smiling and if we are not perfectly careful be lieve me you and i'll go strolling right through these each illimit able to speak very softly altogeth er miracu lous citi zens of (hush
Reading the Greeks, negro statesmen divided Between Athens and Sparta, as the draft constitution Riddled with typing errors, clauses elided For the public executions, Goes to print ... I look up their sources Along the malarial shelves Of our house in the tropics basic texts of courses J and I are teaching, children ourselves. The government electricity Our memory units work by switches itself on At nightfall and we play Defunct McCartney and Lennon Circa 1967. &lsquo; Floats from J's bedroom, where Chinese philosophy, Local Indian hemp, define an ethereal Adolescent, hired for his Greekish sophistry In an adolescent nation. ... Innocent and sensual, blackskinned boys Who ran away from home, for a white education, Keep house for us, bartering joy For rational knowledge. Every day Their unselfconsciousness Wakens, sweeping the topheavy shards away, Clickbeetles dead on the floor. We are needed less. ...
He was one of the consorts of the moon, and went with the goddess in a cart. Wherever he went there would be someone, a few of the last of the old religion. Here the moon passes behind a cloud. Fifteen centuries pass, then one of the bog-peat cutters digs up the man with the rope that ends in a noose at the throat  a head squashed like a pumpkin. Yet, there is delicacy in the features and a peaceful expression... that in Spring the flower comes forth with a music of pipes and dancing.
Pale, then enkindled, light advancing, emblazoning summits of palm and pine, the dew lingering, scripture of scintillas. Soon the roar of mowers cropping the already short grass of lawns, men with long-nozzled cylinders of pesticide poking at weeds, at moss in cracks of cement, and louder roar of helicopters off to spray vineyards where  to hold their breath, and in the distance, bulldozers, excavators, babel of destructive construction. Banded by deep oakshadow, airy shadow of eucalyptus, miner's lettuce, tender, untasted, and other grass, unmown, luxuriant, no green more brilliant. Fragile paradise. At day's end the whole sky, vast, unstinting, flooded with transparent mauve, tint of wisteria, cloudless over the malls, the industrial parks, the homes with the lights going on, the homeless arranging their bundles. Who can utter the poignance of all that is constantly threatened, invaded, expended and constantly nevertheless persists in beauty, tranquil as this young moon just risen and slowly drinking light from the vanished sun. Who can utter the praise of such generosity or the shame?
We walked under cliffs where the Upward and Downward are  under the rolling silence of the hairy stars hearing the jabber of tufted voices and seeing the splayfooted couples grappling on the rigid shelves O Karahana, how those faces stared down! We gave them trinkets of sea and air: The tall girl whose motion was the sun's; Choice screens of hammered brass. A fine golden shepherd dog from Wales and great bowls of naked glass to stand beside wise, tortured harts all hornless and gentler than dictators. Sitting, they and we, on the hot sand twisting our fingers Miserably, like X and Z over a pot of stale tea And the gulls diving ad infinitum dropping themselves Down on the little pennies of fish with their wet squeals. At night the caverns crawl with smooth sex breathing pitifully like a bearded child under the gasping noise of the hooded sky And the human dream! the gritty, scurrying lashes Over the dead eyes The secret of any murder may be found simply By getting together enough fingers to make a hand And seeing if it can hold a gun.
wait i know what you want, you want me to denounce struggle denounce, deny and depreciate struggle and be oh so sophisticated hip, in an educated sort of way, a person well trained a kind of personal Phd demolition specialist proficient at crippling and maiming young minds of potential pushing scholarly drivel, numerous bits of substanceless trivia and unsubstantiated criticisms yes i am more than willing to expell the radicals and flunk half the black kids to prove that i'm really a teacher yes, wait, you don't know my life, what my professional aspirations are i really want to be a department head yes, no i don't mind homosexuals, i could be one, might even marry one (dare i hope to be a president?) i received my masters from white folks, encounter groups, T sessions and discreet orgies done with a touch of class, i've touched the president's dog kissed the pope and helped my brother run for congress my three pieces are all suits, i wear silk ties and sweat overdressed in summer, can speak clearly, ennuciate distinctly and pick white wines in fine french resturants with the best of them, i love cold, snow and air conditioning, think foregin movies are marvelous prefer cullen to baraka, giovanni to lee, and rather tennyson more than them all, have you seen my library? if you hire me i swear i'll never tell the truth again, never, where do i sign?
We dismantle the rooms, dividing the objects we have lived among. Your father, loving and ignorant, writes to me  the importance of good health and family, a garden, the proximity of his children. This big man set a place for me at his table, and I was met at the door like any child, though I, a woman, loved his daughter and arrived with my hair cut short and with manners and speech foreign to him. In his fine handwriting your father has called me his own. And what shall I call you?
Through the window I can see the fog Smothered against the steamy panes of glass. Fog-cold seeps in under doors, Numbing feet in a heated room. There's no keeping it out. It enters through the tiny cracks of window slots And soaks through walls. Place your hand on a wall some heavy morning When the fog hangs low. You will find the paint grown damp and chill, Stealing heat from early-kindled stoves. On such mornings wood won't burn, Smoke hangs in the flue, And the salt lumps up in the shakers over the stove. Only the cedars do not tire of fog; They drip patiently through days, Gathering mist and letting it fall. I have lain in bed and heard the fog-drip Tap all night upon the ground, Given by the silver boughs In renitent release.
O.K., so he's crazy, dowser, cloudbuster. But it's his goodness makes him attempt so variously, assuming rapports. He's looking not at the fragments but for the interplay. It's your pain, my grimace, torments him: <> <> He wanted, even in his first mistakes (the cold girl taken too often hating him at last, escaping) that all should flower, everyone joyful. If his imagination proliferates, it is for you. If not, he gave us the sudden rain last Sunday, the darkening. Maybe raindrops? It's a &lsquo;means of grace&rsquo; he's trying to secure for us. &lsquo;The cloud compact of energy.&rsquo; That we may live.
Far from your crumpled mountains, plains that vultures ponder, White gulches, wounded to pythons from gunshot of thunder: What should I sing in a city of stone, Drawing the bow across skull, across bone? On phosphorescent furrows drifting from the dark sand, We felt the fish pluck, keel grate, were laughed at by the land, Saw searchlights comb corpses' hair in mangroves Malarial, birds beat to quiet coves. The gull shuddered plashing from sharks; and under green glass Delicate needles to death twitched in terror's compass; Crimson on blue blade, gaping like hooked gills The sun was drawn bleeding across the hills. By the sunk schooner, the nets, canoes with broken backs, Was a cathedral, now choral to currents: now shacks Show a negress, children swollen with gas, A man cuts coconuts with a cutlass. This island seemed emerald in the steel furnace flame To the pirate ... Port Royal ... his ship shed clothes as she came To lie in the bay's blue arms, lazy, lean, And gold glowed through the hull with a death sheen. He lay on shore with a black and a gold-hearted girl Whose laugh unhinged like a box of red velvet and pearl. She gave his enemies the Judas word Who came at cock-crow, each one with a sword. Still she cherished in womb the chromosomes for whiteness. Fish flittered about the father's bones, but she could press Her hands to the high jumper there, the warm Mulatto, ambitious in lizard form. This got the start of my bestial, indolent race With coarse skin, crazy laugh, nostrils like swords through the face: Athletes at sixteen, they dive deep and lie In women like waves: in such dark caves die. Bitter pale beauty, the small salty jewels of sun Fade by the ocean. But the fruit of the valleys run From plump bourgeois banana's yellow skin To the cruel cane, cutlass-bladed, thin. Life is a winter liner, here history passes Like tourists on top-decks, seeing the shore through sunglasses: And death, a delightful life-long disease, Sighs in sideways languor of twisted trees.
Where she lived the close remained the best. The nearest music and the static cloud, sun and dirt were all she understood. She planted corn and left the rest to elements, convinced that God with giant faucets regulates the rain and saves the crops from frost or foreign wind. Fate assisted her with special cures. Rub a half potato on your wart and wrap it in a damp cloth. Close your eyes and whirl three times and throw. Then bury rag and spud exactly where they fall. The only warts that I have now are memories or comic on my nose. Up at dawn. The earth provided food if worked and watered, planted green with rye grass every fall. Or driven wild by snakes that kept the carrots clean, she butchered snakes and carrots with a hoe. Her screams were sea birds in the wind, her chopping nothing like it now. I will garden on the double run, my rhythm obvious in ringing rakes, and trust in fate to keep me poor and kind and work until my heart is short, then go out slowly with a feeble grin, my fingers flexing but my eyes gone gray from cramps and the lack of oxygen. Forget the tone. Call the neighbor's trumpet golden as it grates. Exalt the weeds. Say the local animals have class or help me say that ghost has gone to seed. And why attempt to see the cloud again  the screaming face it was before it cracked in wind from Asia and a wanton rain.
of the tribe of the tribes to be the tribe the old strong people nobody thought of messing with If we call ourselves together to be the strength of one character the black fist will work out into an angel You want to know how much stuff You could do? How much you could build or create? How far you could stretch the party in your brain the health in your soul to be funkin' up an down all the streets in the universe like the shaking air Be somebody Beautiful Be Black and Open Reach for God And succeed in your life world heaven will scream at you to enter, enter Black Man bathe in Blackness Energies exploding Black World Renewed Sparks! Stars! Eyes! Huge Holocausts of Heaven Burning down the white man's world Holy Ashes!!! Let the rains melt them into rivers. And the new people naked bathe themselves And look upon the life to come as the heaven we seek
Cinderella had glass slippers I used to believe in because my mother has always worn glass bangles of a special kind  made as I thought from similar glass. Ma's bangles are thick maroon and dark, they are green glints and unbreakable   I think because she can wear them all day: whether she scrubs out clothes or dishes, the glass bangles stay on. Afraid of ruining her gold wedding bangles she somehow trusts the glassy green and maroon. Every day, broom in hand she sweeps out the dust from the verandah, from our doorsteps, while the glass bangles catch the morning sun, the afternoon sun ... Then finally, when she raises her arms to undo the scarf protecting her hair, how the glass bangles glisten, loyal  year after year above her small wrists bands of lingering light illuminating her who would otherwise remain hidden with her work. Nowadays I can't find such sturdy bangles not in Ahmedabad, not in Delhi. The glass snaps like raw spaghetti, like dry twigs from termite emptied trees, like rusty barbed wire, rusty tin shack neighbourhoods where tin roofs creak against their crookedness break against the slightest movement from the wind, from a dog's tail, from a child    who walks out the door. The glass snaps the bangles break.
The window frame catches a draft that smells of dead leaves and wet street, and I wrap arms around my knees, look down on these small breasts, so my spine forms a curve as perfect as the rim of the moon. I want to tell the man sleeping curled as a child beside me that this futon is a raft. The moon and tiny star we call sun are the parents who at last approve of us. For once, we haven't borrowed more than we can return. Stars above our cement backyard are as sharp as those that shine far from Brooklyn, and we are not bound for anything worse than we can imagine, as long as we turn on the kitchen lamp and light a flame under the pot, as long as we sip coffee from beautiful China-blue cups and love the steam of the shower and thrusting our feet into trousers. As long as we walk down our street in sun that ignites red leaves on the maple, we will see faces on the subway and know we may take our places somewhere among them.
The South Sea King was Act-on-Your-Hunch. The North Sea King was Act-in-a-Flash. The King of the place between them was No-Form. Now South Sea King And North Sea King Used to go together often To the land of No-Form: He treated them well. So they consulted together They thought up a good turn, A pleasant surprise, for No-Form In token of appreciation. &ldquo;Men,&rdquo; they said, &ldquo;have seven openings For seeing, hearing, eating, breathing, And so on. But No-Form Has no openings. Let's make him A few holes.&rdquo; So after that They put holes in No-Form, One a day, for seven days. And when they finished the seventh opening, Their friend lay dead. Lao Tan said: &ldquo;To organize is to destroy.&rdquo;
Now not every man has the makings of a barber Or even a tuner of one of those classy white-wood pianos Like they used to have in most of the river towns hereabouts But when you stop to think of it up real close It takes something special to be something special Clint Burrows, now, his kind don't just happen Sure, there was something to start with But you might say a man like him Shook the hand of all his chances One Sunday, for example, he comes walking into church Naked as a jaybird and says in that soft deep voice of his Thanks, Lord, for making me like I am thought I'd just drop in And let you know I'm not ashamed of it either Of course there were some wondered what he was getting at Especially since it was the first time he'd ever attended services And I personally knew he hadn't been steeping himself In the Good Book on the sly because every now and again When I'd pass the saloon on my way home from playing hookey He'd beckon me in to read a piece out of the paper to him Usually something from the front page with his picture alongside it First whole dollar I ever saw I got that way Anybody'd get the idea from those stories That Clint Burrows must have been a real whiz in school <> <> <> Well, if he was, I always thought it pretty strange That he never bothered to learn how to read or write Why, he even had a little fellow named Samuel T. Tomkins Who wrote all his checks for him But, as my Dad always said, you had to hand it to Clint Burrows  In fact, that's just what everybody made a big habit of Except when he'd give me those bright shiny silver dollars, that is It was pretty strange, too, how one fine day Clint Burrows clumb clear to the top Of an oak tree smack in the center of the courthouse park And there wasn't anybody important you can think of Didn't come and try to talk him out of staying up there Until he died But that's just what he did  Yep, that's just what Mr. Burrows did.
Nothing could match the era's dazzling fa&ccedil;ade, The white grace of the pillars in a gloom of trees; No sword has scarred, no vulgar hand has overlaid The pure triumphant form of this American Acropolis: Nothing could match the era's marvelous shell. But push the heavy door and enter the dark chill Of empty halls. Listen while you are told, &ldquo;The locks are solid silver, floors the old cypress still, Mantels Italian marble and twenty-carat gold Gilds the great mirrors&rdquo; that reflect the shabby places In the imported carpet and the tourists' vacant faces. This was a beauty bought intact, mourning no dream, Paid for in cash, perhaps, but with no human breath. It is as brutal, savage as a peacock's scream, Emblem of luxury and emptiness and death  Look for the heart within the house, the center of the cult, Look for the hearth, the household god, the mystery; You will not find it where all is perfect to a fault, Buried and cold under the weight of history, Gone with the swans that swam artificial lakes. Did they with violent beatings of white wings Vanish for all wild beauty death forsakes  To leave the house to die among its things? Nothing could match the era's dazzling fa&ccedil;ade, Nothing more lovely than the white Grecian portico  Where, if there was a dream, did the dream go? Where is the life lived here and what it made? That when you ask, the smug descendants say, &ldquo;We lit a thousand candles here for Henry Clay.&rdquo; The answer is not war that always has intensified A living dream. But here the peacock cried.
In our family, everyone loves flowers. That's why the graves are so odd: no flowers, just padlocks of grass, and in the center, plaques of granite, the inscriptions terse, the shallow letters sometimes filling with dirt. To clean them out, you use your handkerchief. With my sister, it's different, it's an obsession. Weekends, she sits on my mother's porch, reading catalogues. Every autumn, she plants bulbs by the brick stoop; every spring, waits for flowers. No one discusses cost. It's understood my mother pays; after all, it's her garden, every flower planted for my father. They both see the house as his true grave. Not everything thrives on Long Island. Sometimes the summer gets too hot; sometimes a heavy rain beats down the flowers. That's how the poppies died, after one day, because they're very fragile. My mother's tense, upset about my sister: now she'll never know how beautiful they were, pure pink, with no dark spots. That means she's going to feel deprived again. But for my sister, that's the condition of love. She was my father's daughter: the face of love, to her, is the face turning away.
We find your soft Utopias as white As new-cut bread, and dull as life in cells, O scribes who dare forget how wild we are, How human breasts adore alarum bells. You house us in a hive of prigs and saints Communal, frugal, clean and chaste by law. I'd rather brood in bloody Elsinore Or be Lear's fool, straw-crowned amid the straw. Promise us all our share in Agincourt Say that our clerks shall venture scorns and death, That future ant-hills will not be too good For Henry Fifth, or Hotspur, or Macbeth. Promise that through tomorrow's spirit-war Man's deathless soul will hack and hew its way, Each flaunting C&aelig;sar climbing to his fate Scorning the utmost steps of yesterday. Never a shallow jester any more! Let not Jack Falstaff spill the ale in vain. Let Touchstone set the fashions for the wise And Ariel wreak his fancies through the rain. Incense and Splendor haunt me as I go. Though my good works have been, alas, too few, Though I do naught, High Heaven comes down to me, And future ages pass in tall review. I see the years to come as armies vast, Stalking tremendous through the fields of time. <> Flame-like to hover o'er the moil and grime, Striving, aspiring till the shame is gone, Sowing a million flowers where now we mourn  Laying new, precious pavements with a song, Founding new shrines the good streets to adorn. I have seen lovers by those new-built walls Clothed like the dawn in orange, gold and red. Eyes flashing forth the glory-light of love Under the wreath that crowned each royal head. Life was made greater by their sweetheart prayers. Passion was turned to civic strength that day  Piling the marbles, making fairer domes With zeal that else had burned bright youth away. I have seen priestesses of life go by, Gliding in samite through the incense-sea  Innocent children marching with them there, Singing in flowered robes, &ldquo; While on the fair, deep-carved unfinished towers Sentinels watched in armor, night and day  Guarding the brazier-fires of hope and dream  Wild was their peace, and dawn-bright their array!
Let me say this finally in another little song. Truth and beauty were never the aims of proper poetry and the era which proclaimed them was a brutal era. Justice was what Homer sought and Dante and Villon. We cannot force it on these regressive Slavs or these Indonesian murderers but in what is ours, here, let justice be primary when we sing, my dear.
He collects Bakelite from jerkwater towns like this, and can shadow-dance on motel walls, vulpine extravagances mostly, his Molly hasn't the stomach for, although she can cut a mean lupine imitation in a farmer's pasture fine enough to chase sheep up a tree, so their relationship is complicated and they seek counseling whenever they spot a shingle offering some, even at the most ridiculous prices and from people clearly wildered in their wits, foaming at the mouth, etc. It's just part of their road-routine and it seems to help. Tom throws her a biscuit, she blows him a kiss, and the miles roll by, and the woolgathering, and the woolgathering, and the Bakelite gathering. The pharmacy owner says, &ldquo;Whatever would bring you to our town? There's nothing here to see or do.&rdquo; Clouds made in Heaven by the Master, a Chinaman of immense whimsy. The lady in the bar at noon says, &ldquo;He makes me go to those damned dog races every night. Why not a movie and dinner just once?&rdquo; Tom and Molly speeding alongside the coal trains with a joy rarely afforded in a hospital or a bank.
A distant river glimpsed through deep-leaved trees. A field of fragment flint, blue, gray, and red. Rocks overgrown with twigs of trailing vines Thick-hung with clusters of the green wild-grape. Old chestnut groves the haunt of drowsy cows, Full-uddered kine chewing a sleepy cud; Or, at the gate, around the dripping trough, Docile and lowing, waiting the milking-time. Lanes where the wild-rose blooms, murmurous with bees, The bumble-bee tumbling their frowsy heads, Rumbling and raging in the bell-flower's bells, Drunken with honey, singing himself asleep. Old in romance a shadowy belt of woods. A house, wide-porched, before which sweeps a lawn Gray-boled with beeches and where elder blooms. And on the lawn, whiter of hand than milk, And sweeter of breath than is the elder bloom, A woman with a wild-rose in her hair.
In the street I have just left the small leaves of the trees along the gutter were steadfast in the blue heavens. Now the subway express picks up speed and a wind blows through the car, blows dust on the passengers, and along the floor bits of paper  wrappers of candy, of gum, tinfoil, pieces of newspaper ....
<>  Did call upon a King; The King exclaimed: &lsquo;The Queen's away,  Can I do anything?&rsquo; &lsquo;You can,&rsquo; the Carpenter replied,  &lsquo;I want a bit of bread.&rsquo; &lsquo;Why?&rsquo; cried the King; the fellow sighed:  &lsquo;I'm hungry, sire,&rsquo; he said. &lsquo;Dear me! I'll call my Chancellor,  He understands such things; Your claims I cannot cancel, or  Deem them fit themes for kings. &lsquo;Sir Chancellor, why here's a wretch  Starving like rats or mice!&rsquo; The Chancellor replied: &lsquo;I'll fetch  The Steward in a trice.&rsquo; The Steward came, and by his look  You might have guessed he'd shirk; Said he: &lsquo;Your Majesty's mistook,  This is the Butler's work.&rsquo; The Butler said the case was bad,  But quite beyond his power, Seeing it was the Baker had  The keys of cake and flour. The Baker called, &lsquo;The keys I've lost,&rsquo;  He wept; &lsquo;but in a span I'll call the Carp  why, Holy Ghost!  Here is the very man.&rsquo; &lsquo;Hurrah! hurrah!&rsquo; they loudly cried,  &lsquo;How cleverly we've done it! We've solved this question deep and wide  Well nigh ere we'd begun it.&rsquo; &lsquo;Thanks!&rsquo; said the Carpenter; &lsquo;meanwhile  Go moulder on the shelf: The next time I am starving I'll  Take leave to help myself.&rsquo;
The sun beams jovial from an ancient sky,  Flooding the round hills with heroic spate. A callow captain, glaring, sword at thigh,  Trots out his charger through the camp gate. Soon comes the hour, his marriage hour, and soon  He fathers children, reigns with ancestors Who, likewise serving in the wars, won  For a much-tattered flag renewed honours. A wind ruffles the book, and he whose name  Was mine vanishes; all is at an end. Fortunate soldier: to be spared shame  Of chapter-years unprofitable to spend, To ride off into reticence, nor throw  Before the story-sun a long shadow.
You come in dream, Mother, or not at all, distressed by drugs, scattering quips, complaining still about the way they torture you. Married late, you wouldn't leave the party, forced Hawaii to its knees; I've seen the cascades of your hair, heard the devilish laugh each suitor ducked, ricocheting through the rooms; a wastrel girl, uncontrollable. And press through time to take you in my arms, to find you now, coldcocked by suffering, baggage in a train that's plowed its way into the dark and snowy woods, and stopped. I see you there, my dreamer, nodding at your window, unacknowledged, except perhaps by the spotted dog limping in the snow, that sees you lift your head, and trembles in your smoky, avid glance.
Putting the government's new stamp on this envelope, my finger presses with the strength of steel hammers. I can almost feel the ridged horizon of his hairy back break as he turns, half in mid-air, the great green teeth breaking open in the stunned museums, always in that split-second recognition of the moon-eyed stranger who begins to whistle in the skins of ancestors. Blood runs under my nail; it is done. When this comes to you it will not be whatever it thought it was, the head cocked proudly as it thunders off the edge of a paper white field, not an object of admiration or need, a killed thing foolishly smoking among the flies of our dumps, forever.
Bees and lilies there were, Bees and lilies there were, Either to other,  Which would you rather? Bees and lilies were there. The green grasses, would they? The green grasses?  She asked her skin To let me in: The far leaves were for it. Forever is easy, she said. How many angels do you know?  And over by Algy's Something came by me, It wasn't a goose, It wasn't a poodle. Everything's closer. Is this a cage? The chill's gone from the moon. Only the woods are alive. I can't marry the dirt. I'm a biscuit. I'm melted already. The white weather hates me. Why is how I like it. I can't catch a bush. The herrings are awake. What's all the singing between?  Is it with whispers and kissing?  I've listened into the least waves. The grass says what the wind says: Begin with the rock; End with water. When I stand, I'm almost a tree. Leaves, do you like me any? A swan needs a pond. The worm and the rose Both love Rain. O small bird wakening, Light as a hand among blossoms, Hardly any old angels are around any more. The air's quiet under the small leaves. The dust, the long dust, stays. The spiders sail into summer. It's time to begin! To begin!
The hydrangea pink cheeked nods its head a paper brain without a skull a brain intestined to the invisible root where beside the rose and acorn thought lies communal with the brooding worm True but the air remains the wanton the dancing that holding enfolds it a flower aloof Flagrant as a flag it shakes that seamy head or snaps it drily from the anchored stem and sets it rolling
Puzzle faces in the dying elms promise him treats if he will stay. Sometimes they hiss and spit at him like varmints caught in a thicket of butterflies. A black doll, one disremembered time, came floating down to him through mimosa's fancywork leaves and blooms to be his hidden bride. From the road beyond the creepered walls they call to him now and then, and he'll take off in spite of the angry trees, hearing like the loudening of his heart the name he never can he never can repeat. And when he gets to where the voices were  Don't cry, his dollbaby wife implores; I know where they are, don't cry. We'll go and find them, we'll go and ask them for your name again.
The good cats have a Pegasus, A proud ghost, very strong. He will not teach the cats to fly, Nor teach them song. His opera is excellent, His monologues are great, Ranging from orator Saving his native state To an actor speaking East Lynne lines In a way to carry weight. And he can carol manfully, Higher than this and higher, Outdoing Wagner even in The Song of The Magic Fire. And though this cat can sing like men And the kittens ride his back, Hoping to learn the notes his way, He keeps their voices slack. He wants to be the only cat In Heaven that sings, and then He loves their tortured hopeless hope To be at last like men!
In this case Mary's mama is correspondent: blind witch with threaded needles on the family table. Ping-pong money to the poor. Poor Mary gone off C.O.D. in a golden trunk head handed to her. At the furnace where Bigger hatted up, mama's touching led him crazy (what begins with N and rhymes with Bigger) on, on, on.
Just as morning twilight and the gulls start talking the cinnamon moon goes down over Stage Fort park one night short of full as I too almost full also leave all those whom I have thought were equally moving equally at least as much a part of this world and its character as these rounds of planets the sun, within thirty-one further minutes will have started lighting up the East across East Gloucester arm and, if I add this house or its place on the Earth, three solid powers of being pass in property and principle acausal also in this empirical world as I, and as I still cannot believe my friends aren't too, no matter that they choose or may, identity itself a recognition cognition  that this moon in itself is cinnamon and bore an image in my life as it now going on to China will twelve hours from now bring tides again on this side, reverse flow to the effect of its presence here 12 other hours I do not speak of solar proton ion force effect on both their &amp; my these two friends, a man &amp; woman I have had reason to say were my only brother-sister, never having but one, a brother who died at birth a year before myself was born  that they or I were not effected too in birth and or conception or in both by either ions stored in earth or thrown at her by the sun at equinox, like-fluctuation to the moon's twy- tidal affect. Go down, moon and teach me too to swallow what by analogy and continuity I now, at 55 know is as much condition as the purchase of my soul by love as they
The game was to walk run if you dared  along the curb and never step off upon the sidewalk or into the gutter; if you did, you went to the back  last in line. I was last but did not mind; I could step as I liked and, if without any honor, I was also without the weight of it. The leader turned the corner into a side street where I had never been; &ldquo;I am going around the block!&rdquo; he shouted boldly. &ldquo;Around the block, around the block!&rdquo; shouted the other boys and girls gaily and followed. Hesitant, I followed too. In the side street, the autumn afternoon had grown dark and cold. The roots of the great trees that stood along the sidewalk had lifted the flags of the pavement in places; and, unlike the bright avenue where we lived, the gutter was heaped with leaves: a dark and awesome street. Silent, we ran along the curb, eager to be back before the familiar doors.
<> That sits within a garden of quietness: A welcomed visitor by day or night, I win a refuge from life's storm and stress. Ah, here no footfalls cease and then resume, Nor sounds of closing doors nor creaking beams; And throned within her favorite gold room Amid the roses' perfume and the gloom, I greet my smiling hostess, Madame of Dreams. I know not how I won so dear a friend, I know not of her family or her race; Her voice is a sweet music without end Unfolding the wistful beauty of her face. She has known all the world's great tragedies  Was at the ruins of Troy and Actium; And her deep heart holds many memories That are the ghosts of countless aching sighs Dead lovers uttered ere their lips grew dumb. She seems so old from her experience  With Egypt's queen she sailed along the Nile  She heard Demosthenes' great eloquence  Saw Camelot melt 'neath Arthur's golden smile. But Time has dealt with her as with the sea, Whereon it leaves not any scars nor seams; And like a bud that breaks at last to be A faultless rose June's dews and suns decree  Beauty and Youth have crowned Madame of Dreams.
Flowing, glowing music drifting through the tangled trees, Ringing through the midnight on the light and dancing breeze; Flashing figures whirling in the pale light of the moon, Sweeping, leaping gypsies spinning to a lilting tune! Down upon the creekside where the rules sway and nod, Out upon the meadow in the glowing goldenrod, Deep within the shadows where the moonbeams never pierce, Everywhere is music ringing fiery and fierce! It is rising, flinging, falling like the Northwind in a tree, Or a joy-mad ghoul a-whirling in an ecstasy of glee! Strangely woven in the music; in the eery wail and sob Is the age-old thumping rhythm of the tom-tom's savage throb. Oh, the whirling, swirling figures of the gypsies, everywhere Are a-spinning, dancing, leaping, in the fire's fitful flare; Like a merman in a maelstrom swishing through the seething sea, Is the band of swaying gypsies crazy-mad with melody!
She says he came back that night. She lay awake, The usual skeletons propped up in their cupboards With best-china faces. The guns began to bark; The shrapnel pattered. When more stones fall than usual, Consult the Sibylline Books. I do consult them, But the pale snapshots in their padded albums Are ancient lights, ambiguous oracles. We know, though, he was out, and at his post: One of those Augurs in their stencilled helmets Reading the scrawled sky, the city's entrails. Stoics and bombs whistle as lightning strikes; The skeletons crooned, bouncing up at keyholes. She, hoping, praying that we would make old bones, And, as she swears, with all her wits about her, Turned to find him there in the smallest hours, Moving about the room he had shored up With baulks of timber. Under those auspices They chatted together for a little while, Her fear draining away, the heartbeats gentle, Before he closed the door upon himself, Blacked out his shadow on that darker shadow So tightly they grew indivisible. Later, much later, she got out of bed And laid a breakfast of crossed purposes, While he, rubbing the fires from his eyes, Wrote out a testament, alas, gone missing, To clear himself of presence without leave That night when Love and Duty had his name So clearly down upon their distant rosters. Martial says &lsquo;Dream of yourself, or stay awake.&rsquo; She says that he came back; he still denies it. I was asleep. What I saw I will not tell you.
Nobody now throughout the pleasant day, The flowers well tended and the friends not few, Teases my mind as only you could do To mortal combat erudite and gay ... &ldquo;So Mr. S. was kind to Mr. K.! Whilst Mr. K. wait, I've a word or two!&rdquo; (I think that Keats and Shelley died with you  They live on paper now, another way.) You left in time, too soon; to leave too soon Was tragic and in order had the great Not taught us how to die? My simple blood, Loving you early, lives to mourn you late ... As Mr. K., it may be, would have done; As Mr. S. (
Say that it is a crude effect, black reds, Pink yellows, orange whites, too much as they are To be anything else in the sunlight of the room, Too much as they are to be changed by metaphor, Too actual, things that in being real Make any imaginings of them lesser things. And yet this effect is a consequence of the way We feel and, therefore, is not real, except In our sense of it, our sense of the fertilest red, Of yellow as first color and of white, In which the sense lies still, as a man lies, Enormous, in a completing of his truth. Our sense of these things changes and they change, Not as in metaphor, but in our sense Of them. So sense exceeds all metaphor. It exceeds the heavy changes of the light. It is like a flow of meanings with no speech And of as many meanings as of men. We are two that use these roses as we are, In seeing them. This is what makes them seem So far beyond the rhetorician's touch.
Crown Oedipus king, He rules this world. Great monarch of the mind, And the heart's red master, Regent tyrannous, Throned in the kingdom of the soul. On his right hand dries the blood of the fathers. On his left hand dries the blood of the sons. Crown Oedipus king. He rules supreme. Or nearly so. For I see now how maybe some few, Gifted in luck, Maybe some whom as in earliest age Fate spared, Let a true ambiance of being Dwell from the start, Some father fond in his role, Some natural son Given that innocence of eye To thaw the rectitude of a father's frost And in kindness bestowed, Grow beside him, With kindness blent, By kindness blessed  Father: if I could reach you my hand, Through the borderlands that lie beyond life, Press through that painful place to what once was, Reach to that germ, that natural love  No. But rather will all my sleep be wronged. Rather will my life's small triumphs, Hugged, like those childish toys, A little fardel of hope to my heart, Slip from my hands, When you trouble the edges of a dream And I waver, Anxious, uncertain, and all afraid.
<> That vanished many a summer ago, And left no trace but the cellar walls, And a cellar in which the daylight falls, And the purple-stemmed wild raspberries grow. O'er ruined fences the grape-vines shield The woods come back to the mowing field; The orchard tree has grown one copse Of new wood and old where the woodpecker chops; The footpath down to the well is healed. I dwell with a strangely aching heart In that vanished abode there far apart On that disused and forgotten road That has no dust-bath now for the toad. Night comes; the black bats tumble and dart; The whippoorwill is coming to shout And hush and cluck and flutter about: I hear him begin far enough away Full many a time to say his say Before he arrives to say it out. It is under the small, dim, summer star. I know not who these mute folk are Who share the unlit place with me  Those stones out under the low-limbed tree Doubtless bear names that the mosses mar. They are tireless folk, but slow and sad, Though two, close-keeping, are lass and lad,  With none among them that ever sings, And yet, in view of how many things, As sweet companions as might be had.
The honey of man is the task we're set to:to be &lsquo;more ourselves&rsquo; in the making: &lsquo;bees of the invisible&rsquo; working in cells of flesh and psyche, filling &lsquo;la grande ruche d&thorn;or.&rsquo; Nectar, the makings of the incorruptible, is carried upon the corrupt tongues of mortal insects, fanned with their wisps of wing &lsquo;to evaporate excess water,&rsquo; enclosed and capped with wax, the excretion of bees&rsquo; abdominal glands. Beespittle, droppings, hairs of beefur: all become honey. Virulent micro-organisms cannot survive in honey. The taste, the odor of honey: each has no analogue but itself. In our gathering, in our containing, in our working, active within ourselves, slowly the pale dew-beads of light lapped up from flowers can thicken, darken to gold: honey of the human.
half-sick with old Indian in the fire of the tall grass of the moose range. In the tall grass of the brown bear above timberline on moose range four men from Colorado understood why Jim Wilson spent two days, at Bishop's Caf&eacute;, at the trailer of the  on the mail run, at the timberline where cats, motor rigs parked, the hill of the high grass on the moose range and brown bear; to pay money, all you want, to visit Colorado free, as long as you want, stay, to promise it won't cost a cent, from the tall grass the brown bear and range of moose in the tall grass: settle with Jim Wilson: &ldquo;Didn't know there was this kind of animal in North America&rdquo;  On the way back, along the timber- line, in the tall grass the brown bear, the iced rain
Oh, what sorrow! Oh, what pity! Oh, what pain That tears and blood Should mix like rain And terror come again To Mississippi. Again? Where has terror been? On vacation? Up North? In some other section Of the Nation, Lying low, unpublicized, Masked with only Jaundiced eyes showing Through the mask? What sorrow, pity, pain, That tears and blood Still mix like rain In Mississippi!
In the maintenance corridor somewhere below Someone is dragging a bucket of dried-up cement. You could hear it snag on the runners in doorways And the private  The clock and cloudy weather, The low volume of afternoon traffic, The city editions arriving on newsagents' counters All give their consent. Things continue, Among them this task, whose inception Has not been made clear; and its agent, Who wrestles his bucket to stand on a desk In a windowless room at the corridor's end, Likewise continues. He takes out the slip From his overall pocket and offers the use of his biro To air and the view of Caithness on the calendar Thoughtfully placed on the opposite wall.
When I sit before a paper writing my mind turns in a kind of feminine madness of chatter; but to think to see, outside, in a tenement the walls of the universe itself I wait: wait till the sky appears as it is, wait for a moment when the poem itself is my way of speaking out, not declaiming of celebrating, yet, but telling the truth.
Guilt creeps like sheets of insects that erase bodies down to their skeletons. I can't face the  through horrible advances in photography  are blown up to sticky, gargantuan hairtaffy and I, the reader, am the haruspex who knows the future will be cleaned of joy by the bone-sanding methods guilt employs. I refused to open up my sister's letters, overwhelmed with guilt that I had run away and left her in our parents' house. The orthography of my name crawled across her floral paper like fragile, thoracic legs. Unanswered, her letters came faster, their hoardlike script the raper of each envelope's field. Was I better yet? Now should I go back and get her? The insectile inscribing became an erasing of what I hoped to be by what I felt I was, occasionally pictured in science magazines, something entirely obliterated and picked clean.
Now forth to meadow as the farmer goes With shining buckets to the milking-ground, He meets the black ant hurrying from his mound To milk the aphis pastured on the rose; But no good-morrow, as you might suppose, No nod of greeting, no perfunctory sound Passes between them; no occasion's found For gossip as to how the fodder grows. In chilly autumn on the hardening road They meet again, driving their flocks to stall, Two herdsmen, each with winter for a goad; They meet and pass, and never a word at all Gives one to t'other. On the quaint abode Of each, the evening and the first snow fall.
when i am in Boston,i do not speak. and i sit in the click of ivory balls.... noting flies,which jerk upon the weak colour of table-cloths,the electric When In Doubt Buy Of(but a roof hugs whom) as the august evening mauls Kneeland,and a waiter cleverly lugs indigestible honeycake to men ....one perfectly smooth coffee tasting of hellas,i drink,or sometimes two remarking cries of paklavah meeah. (Very occasionally three.) and i gaze on the cindercoloured little  &Egr;&Lgr;&Lgr;&EEgr;&Ngr;&Igr;&Kgr;&Ogr;&Ngr; &Zgr;&Egr;&Ngr;&Ogr;&Dgr;&Ogr;&KHgr;&Egr;&Igr;&Ogr;&Ngr; &Ggr;&Pgr;&Ngr;&Ogr;&Ggr;
That's the only image That turns up. A wall, all by itself, Poorly lit, beckoning, But no sense of the room, Not even a hint Of why it is I remember That fragment so clearly: The fly I was watching, The details of its wings Glowing like turquoise, Its feet, to my amusement Following a minute crack  An eternity Around that simple event. And nothing else, and nowhere To go back to, And no one else As far as I know to verify.
<> <> <> <> <> <>   <> <> <> <> <>   <> <> <> <> <> <> <>
Whatever it may be whoever it may be The bloody man all singing all just However he die He rode on railroad cars He woke at dawn, in the white light of a new universe He couldn't do any different He the skeleton with eyes raised himself up from a wooden bench felt different looking at the fields and palm trees no money in the bank of dust no nation but inexpressible gray clouds before sunrise lost his identity cards in his wallet in the bald rickshaw by the Maidan in dry Patna Later stared hopeless waking from drunken sleep dry mouthed in the RR Station among sleeping shoeshine men in loincloth on the dirty concrete Too many bodies thronging these cities now
That's him finished, halfway down the hall, His good line gone, his afterlife unsure. Then this one's written on the mirror With her lipstick,  Imprisoned in the gesture, and her breath Will neither clear nor wholly cloud the glass In which we glimpse ourselves behind her, there To sympathize or think of something else. Useless at this point to rifle the drawers Or go over and peer through the blinds: The hat suspended from its chute of smoke Is there, or not. It makes no difference. This is the case for everything in sight  The barbershop, the take-away, the steps That climb to the cathedral where they met; Or down the other way towards the bridge Where the receding globes of milky light Have met the dark's advancing rain halfway And are reflected far below, in what We shall imagine is the rising tide. We must accept the sickle moon as well, Quite openly reclining on its page Of rotten weather, granting with its gaze The general irony designed for nights That will not be remembered when at last The horsemen choose to come, delivering Their fire and sword, supposing that's the case.
The wind is up and as we wind down it grows harder, colder, harsher. He is the boy arms around his knees like a shepherd in a loincloth dappled under trees who gazed out to the hills where life somewhere else raced faster. His watchface even now is skudding on his wrist, tracking like a ninja-cloud following its master. (The wind was up but has changed its mind, only leaves in close-up are blowing harder ...) What was it he was gazing at across those hills, eyes trained on a flare, ears keened to a call of horizons? We have captured him and blown him up, in shade, in youth, while his unseen flock  what flock, what fleece?  grows larger, smaller, larger.
Where sinks deep my love, dead love, That so warmly glowed awhile? Where the passion of my dreams And the kiss of afterwhile? In the City of Delight, In the palace built of air, In the smile of dying Day And the vision of Despair. Not where Morning shakes the dew From the sunshine of her locks; Not where Evening breathes her flame And the moon so gently rocks; But where gleams the firefly's wing In the swamp of dead desire; And a fairy shrinks amazed At the passing of the fire.
The spouse of Naoise, Erin's woe, Helen and Venus long ago, Their charms would fade, their fame would flee, Beside mo gradh, mo stor, mo chree,  My Sibby, O! Her eyes are gray like morning dew, Her curling hair falls to her shoe, The swan is blacker than my nail, Beside my queen, my Granuaile,  My Sibby, O! The King of France would give his throne To share her pillow (what's the rhyme at all?) So would I myself. . . .  The Spanish fleet is on the sea To carry away mo gradh, mo stor!  My Sibby, O!
His argosy spreads dawn-kissed sails,  His trireme oars the dusk, On mythic seas whereover gales  Of summer breathe their musk. He hears the hail of Siren bands  From headlands sunset-kissed; The Lotus-eaters wave him hands  Pale in a land of mist. For many a league he hears the roar  Of the Symplegades; And through the far foam of its shore  The Isle of Circe sees. All day he looks with hazy lids  At sea-gods cleave the deep; All night he hears the Nere&iuml;ds  Sing their wild hearts to sleep. When heaven thunders overhead,  And hell upheaves the Vast, Dim faces of the ocean's dead  Gaze at him from his mast. He but repeats the oracle  That bade him first set sail; And cheers his soul with, &ldquo;All is well!  Sail on! I will not fail!&rdquo; Behold! he sails no earthly barque,  And on no earthly sea  Adown the years he sails the dark  Deeps of futurity. Ideals are the ships of Greece  His purpose steers afar: His seas, the skies, the Golden Fleece  He seeks, the farthest star.
My father thought it bloody queer, the day I rolled home with a ring of silver in my ear half hidden by a mop of hair. &lsquo;You've lost your head. If that's how easily you're led you should've had it through your nose instead.&rsquo; And even then I hadn't had the nerve to numb the lobe with ice, then drive a needle through the skin, then wear a safety-pin. It took a jeweller's gun to pierce the flesh, and then a friend to thread a sleeper in, and where it slept the hole became a sore, became a wound, and wept. At twenty-nine, it comes as no surprise to hear my own voice breaking like a tear, released like water, cried from way back in the spiral of the ear.  <>
I have two roosters Buried in my backyard, Two roosters pecking Under the earth, Only their green tails showing. And they turn, These two weathervanes, Inching their Saw-toothed shadows, A log of twilight, A log of sunlight Sawed clean. Dew Trickling down To that blacksmith's anvil Where their lances And shields are hammered. Vegetables, Readying themselves For the battlefield, For that summer night When the moon is worn Like a sleeve at the elbow, And my window turned Toward the Pacific Needs ancient sentries, For the oil dozing With one eye open In its bottle, for The cleft-footed garlic Hung by a nail, for The salt and pepper Weighing the house down Against the storms That are coming ... Until that time, that supper Immaculate and solemn, When they'll shed their armor And place on each plate Between the fork and the knife The lost heart of Saint Francis Lover of birds In a wreath of thorns.
Mouse hopping from mouth to mouth: For all those child-like souls who crept on all fours  through loopholes in the city wall; For deserters from the wars, all drenched in sweat and  dust beneath their chain-mail; For the hired assassins crying out for baptism, for  those historians, provocateurs Of songs and riddles, who preserve the myth in  annotated airs; For the brief reign of kings who only have an hour  to go; for mothers-to-be Who hide their embryos in wombs until they pick  their time and place to be; For the epileptics, in whom Lucifer has been condemned  to genuflect Forever twitching; for those guided by a star; for  that Byzantine sect Whose bishops' ears are stuffed with ceremonial  cotton wool, who chant of hope Because they suffer the   for the Romish Pope; For those wing&egrave;d choirs of Pandemonium and Princip-  alities; for movie queens All spellbound by their beauty to the millions gazing  at the silent screens; For all those quacks who speculate in pain; for  long-dead Draculas Who re-appear in snap-shot family portraits; for the  miraculous Ontology of life in other galaxies, and all their  bat-eared aliens; And even for myself, the self-deluded author of these  simple lines: See me, riding on my spitfire stallion, just back from  the fairy-story Where it grazed on live coals:    <>
When I was ten years old  And Grandfather would complain To me and my two brothers   Would angrily maintain: That beer was not so hearty,  Nor such good songs sung, Nor bread baked so wholesome  As when himself was young, Nor youth so respectful,  We made no contradiction, Though Grandfather was mistaken   Or we held that conviction. Now fifty years have passed,  But when likewise I complain To my three rude young grandsons,  And angrily maintain That beer is not so hearty,  Nor such good songs sung, Nor bread baked so wholesome  As when myself was young, Nor youth so respectful,  I meet with contradiction  Though with fact, and solid fact,  To support my conviction. You may call me a liar,  Grandchildren, without fear ... Yet ask your nearest brewer  If he still brews honest beer, Or ask your nearest baker  If he still bakes honest bread, Then come back here to-morrow  To tell me what they said; Or sing me whatever  You may think is still a song, And I'll make no contradiction  But leave you in the wrong.
By way of Fishguard, all the lying devils Are back to Holy Ireland whence they came. Each took a single fare: which cost them less And brought us comfort. The dumb devils too Take single fares, return by rail to Scotland Whence they came. So the air is cool and easy. And if, in some quarter of some big city, A little Eire or a little Scotland Serves as a rallying-point for a few laggards, No matter, we are free; from taint of them. And at the fire-side now (drinking our coffee), If I ask, 'But to what township did they book, Those dumb devils of Scotland?' you will answer: &lsquo;There's the Bass Rock, once more a separate kingdom, Leagued with Ireland, the same cold grey crag Screamed against by the gulls that are all devils.&rsquo; And of the Irish devils you will answer: &lsquo;In Holy Ireland many a country seat Still stands unburned as Cooper's Hill, Lisheen, Cloghan Castle, or Killua in County Galway  For the devils to enter, unlock the library doors And write love-letters and long threatening letters Even to us, if it so pleases them.&rsquo;
I have occupied the smallest space challenging in my way even the precise fervor of cats to compress in sunlight those immeasurable bodies which are their own ultimate geography I have confused this contraction with virtue and have made silence into a sort of religion until I forget what half-heard question from a young mouth itself half- trembling with listless shyness crossed over a day later to my mind on a grey morning when there are trucks outside stopped in front of quiet houses I have tried to answer with words and not-words until this confession itself seems comfortably beside the point lyrical elaborate and safe If I was quiet it was only that I was thinking If I was thinking of something it was you I think If it was you it's all the stranger I didn't answer when you spoke.
Proud? Perhaps and yet I cannot say with surety That I am happy thus to be Responsible for this young life's embarking. Is he not thrall to prevalent conditions? Does not the day loom dark apace To weave its cordon of disgrace Around his lifted throat? Is not this mezzotint enough and surfeit For such prescience? Ah, did I dare Recall the pulsing life I gave, And fold him in the kindly grave! Proud? Perhaps could I but ever so faintly scan The broad horizon of a man Swept fair for his dominion  So hesitant and half-afraid I view this babe of sorrow!
The  purveyors of artists' materials from their warehouse in Garnet Street, a stone's throw from the river, vendors of paint, small bottles, aerosols, but paper chiefly cream, pale oatmeal, speckled, translucent, edges stiffly cut or deckled. A pirouette of spectacular bones blew softly in the draught of the door. You could construct the skeleton by cutting and glueing together the pages of a book with delicate labels: the thing required patience to collate, life-sized at last, if rather underweight. There is a crystal skull, I do believe, in the British Museum, more articulate, more valuable perhaps, but card will do; it grins among the sketchbooks with its patent, its ethmoid, larmical and zygomatic, it could even whisper something politic of skulls like paper, piled high in ditches, two sets of grandparents, an uncle or two, of cousins boarding trains, securely labelled, and people watching one another from windows. Under the eyes their bones flare for a minute, collapse to powder on a distant planet, subside and sink, and form a kind of silt, washed down by rivers, drifting among boots and waste from sewers, sticking to dead branches, caught by the ebb tide sun along the bank, sucked finally to sea in salt-sour smells, and settling dumbly among rocks and bells.
<> oval world, and enters another oval world. &ldquo;Cheep ... cheep ... cheep&rdquo; is the salutation of the newcomer, the emigrant, the casual at the gates of the new world. &ldquo;Cheep ... cheep&rdquo; ... from oval to oval, sunset to sunset, star to star. It is at the door of this house, this teeny weeny egg- shell exit, it is here men say a riddle and jeer each other: who are you? where do you go from here? (In the academies many books, at the circus many sacks of peanuts, at the club rooms many cigar butts.) &ldquo;Cheep ... cheep&rdquo; ... from oval to oval, sunset to sunset, star to star.
A burst of confidence. Confiding a treasured thing kept inside, as it if were a burden, worrying about money, or were pride and ambition struggling  sings out. It was a song I did not sing. The men are working in the street. The sound of pick and pneumatic drill punctuates the chirrup a bird makes, a natural will who works the tossing dandelion head  a sheaf of poems. They are employd at making up a joyous possibility. They are making a living where I take my life. With no more earnest skill than this working song sings  as if the heart's full responsibility were in the rise of words as momentarily that bird's notes he concentrates above the swaying bough, the fluttering wings. For joy breaks thru insensible to our human want. Were we birds too upon some blowing crown of seeds, it would be so  we'd sing as we do. <> <>
One time years ago a man tried to sell me a girl he claimed was his daughter; with his thumbnail he pushed the lank, loose hair away from her face, he traced with his forefinger the proposal of her lips, the thin lifted shills of her breasts. I think I wanted to hit him, but I didn't. I said yes, and took her away under the mimosas that were wet with the afternoon's rain, thinking that like a cat I couldn't keep, I would set her loose in the desert. But she wasn't a cat and from that town it was miles to the desert we wound up, somehow, on a street whose enamel gutters ran in the mornings with the blood of slaughtered hogs, drinking at the tin bar of a dark place, where a three-piece band played music compounded of gravel and sarcasm, and women in ripped dresses danced wildly, as if in torment, with thin men who cracked pecans between their teeth as they danced, and laughed at nothing. I remember for one moment I looked at her small face and thought I saw my own romantic notion of promise fall from it, but maybe I didn't see anything at all, and maybe she had stopped caring long before I blundered by, but whatever I might have thought I soon forgot quickly, quickly so that when I looked again the gray dawn was getting to its feet in the doorway, and a man I had never seen before snored on top of the bar, and the wild women had retreated into the mossy places they hid in during the day; and she was gone, without blessing or any enterprise I could muster, lost to the claims of the street, from which came now the squeals of pigs, as the quick knives opened the large vein in their throats, and allowed what they had been keeping to themselves to pour forth.
Poise was always your pose, Jakob; not just here in the staring studio (where at seventy you flaunt the guarded peace of those who have ceased to ask what comes next for Jakob, it appears  but in the Opera House (where a society gets and disavows  the sorcery it deserves). Poise was your profession from the first; perhaps you had it when Clementi pushed you, barely seven, on stage in Berlin to perform the D minor Concerto of another prodigy who died the year you were born; or when the Singspiel you wrote for von Weber failed and Salieri (in Vienna) cautioned against composing &ldquo;too Viennese&rdquo;: <> <> where Rossini's cauldron seethed about your ears, and the music fell between all stools or into them, as that demented Wagner keeps saying. You have heard better &ldquo;Jewish jokes&rdquo; than his these forty-five years just now you told Nadar your favorite: who was it gave Palestine its name? The Philistines! &ldquo;We Jews are always German at puberty, but we die French.&rdquo; Three more years and you will die frank, at least: &ldquo;composing operas without my old Scribe is like having to grow up over and over an eternal process of learning what can't be done well, or again, or ever.&rdquo; You wanted fame on your own terms or no fame  no hollow victories. And you had just that, poised conjuror, had your cold and commonplace legerdemain. Hold the pose.
Let him pan. His sluice will rot and flake. Here, the gold is river, coiling gold around gold stones or bouncing gold down flat runs where the riffles split the light. With just that shack he built beside the stream how could he get so fat? Where's the food from? Why so cheerful with a flimsy roof, no money and that crude hair in his ears? What put him this far from the world? Be out of your way in a minute. No cat dies at home. Even as your spit lands on my neck, I swear to you my bones will not impose. Let the world have lovers. Alders hide me and the crashing river muffles any cry my other mouth might make. If I could live like him, my skin stained gold from this gold stream, I'd change my name. I have to find a trout or something bright but hidden by refraction, heavier than sin. That's why today, my last day here, while he is rinsing blankets in the river, before I go that long east to my gold I shout my best goodbye across the roar.
Among stooped getters, grimy, knacker-bare, head down thrusting a 3 cwt corf turned your crown bald, your golden hair chafed fluffy first and then scuffed off, chick's back, then eggshell, that sunless white. You strike sparks and plenty but can't see. You've been underneath too long to stand the light. You're lost in this sonnet for the bourgeoisie. Patience Kershaw, bald hurryer, fourteen, this wordshift and inwit's a load of crap for dumping on a slagheap, I mean <> I stare into the fire. Your skinned skull shines. I close my eyes. That makes a dark like mines. Wherever hardship held its tongue the job 's breaking the silence of the worked-out-gob.
out of bigg est the knownun barn 's on tiptoe darkne ss boyandgirl come into a s unwor ld 2 to be blessed by floating are shadows of ove r us-you-me a n g e l s
died, slumped in her ice-cream van on Wombwell market. It's like New York City some days at that crossroads. I mean the traffic, I mean the indifference. Mr Spencer at the Spencer Sewing Centre hangs a tape measure around his neck wears it an inch longer each year from the right to the left. Time passes. Like new York City, I mean the high buildings, I mean the indifference. Grace knitted, slack times, Decembers in her van. I mean the cold, I mean the indifference. Mr Spencer, late December, pulls an inch moving closer to Grace.
Girl do you think Girl do you think ever Waking stretching your small Arms your back arched Your long legs straight Out your mouth red Round in a pout in a half Yawn half smile Do you think delicate Girl with the skin smoother than Silver cooler than apples Delicate cool girl Do you think as your throat Lifts your breath Catches ever of Me far back Buried under the many Nights layer on layer Like a city taken a town Fallen in antique wars and forgotten? Half awake on your bed the images Fading from the edge of sleep As the salt rim of the surf from the wet Sand do you think of me As men long landed from the famous ships Beached by the bright Aegean and the sails brought silver down Of the fallen town Of the white walls in the sun the cicadas The smell of eucalyptus by the sea?
Position is where you put it, where it is, did you, for example, that large tank there, silvered, with the white church along- side, lift all that, to what purpose? How heavy the slow world is with everything put in place. Some man walks by, a car beside him on the dropped road, a leaf of yellow color is going to fall. It all drops into place. My face is heavy with the sight. I can feel my eye breaking.
The process calls for twenty heads to stare All winter at  to transfer Color to  Bobbing at his BEATLES kit. And so, With MFA in studio art (watercolor), Lani's now employed, nonunion, by Ted Turner, Applying &ldquo;color sense&rdquo; on a computer screen. Today, it's John's face in the train coach scene: She wants the flesh lifelike, a British pale, While he croons &ldquo;I Should Have Known Better,&rdquo; wails Through his harmonica, alive almost. Next cubicle, Lani's friend fills in another scene, beaming Paul Chased through alleys by his pimply fans. She's shading his peach-fuzz, the lips that form &ldquo;Where's John.&rdquo;
As I walked out that sultry night,  I heard the stroke of One. The moon, attained to her full height,  Stood beaming like the sun: She exorcized the ghostly wheat To mute assent in love's defeat,  Whose tryst had now begun. The fields lay sick beneath my tread,  A tedious owlet cried, A nightingale above my head  With this or that replied  Like man and wife who nightly keep Inconsequent debate in sleep  As they dream side by side. Your phantom wore the moon's cold mask,  My phantom wore the same; Forgetful of the feverish task  In hope of which they came, Each image held the other's eyes And watched a grey distraction rise  To cloud the eager flame  To cloud the eager flame of love,  To fog the shining gate; They held the tyrannous queen above  Sole mover of their fate, They glared as marble statues glare Across the tessellated stair  Or down the halls of state. And now warm earth was Arctic sea,  Each breath came dagger-keen; Two bergs of glinting ice were we,  The broad moon sailed between; There swam the mermaids, tailed and finned, And love went by upon the wind  As though it had not been.
During this summer of the long drought The road to Synod Inn has kept Its stigmata of dust and barley seed; At the inquest they tell it again: How the lorry tents us from the sun, His pulse dangerous in my hands, A mains hum only, no message Coming through. His face warm, profiled Against tarmac, the two-stroke Yamaha Dead as a black horse in a war. Only his hair moves and the sound Of the parched grass and harebells a handspan Away, his fear still with me like the scream Of a jet in an empty sky. I cover him with the grey blanket From my bed, touch his face as a child Who makes her favourites cosy. His blood on my hands, his cariad  Driving her home we share that vision Over August fields dying of drought Of the summer seas shattering At every turn of Cardigan Bay Under the cruel stones of the sun.
The buckles glitter, billies lean Supple and cold as men on walls. The trusties' faces, yawning green, Summon up heart, as someone calls For light, for light! and evening falls. Checking the cells, the warden piles Shadow on shadow where he goes Beyond the catwalk, down the files, Sneering at one who thumbs his nose. One weeps, and stumbles on his toes. Tear and tormented snicker and heart Click in the darkness; close, and fade. Clean locks together mesh and part, And lonely lifers, foot and head, Huddle against the bed they made. Lie dark, beloved country, now. Trouble no dream, so still you lie. Citizens drawl their dreams away; Stupored, they hid their agony Deep in the rock; but men must die. Tall on the earth I would have sung Heroes of hell, could I have learned Their names to marvel on my tongue; The land is dark where they have turned, And now their very names are burned. But buried under trestled rock The broken thief and killer quake: Tower by tower and clock by clock Citizens wind the towns asleep. God, God have pity when they wake. Haunted by gallows, peering in dark, I conjure prisons out of wet And strangling pillows where I mark The misery man must not forget, Though I have found no prison yet. Lo now, the desolation man Has tossed away like a gnawed bone Will hunt him where the sea began, Summon him out of tree and stone, Damn him, before his dream be gone:  Seek him behind his bars, to crack Out the dried kernel of his heart. God, God have pity if he wake, Have mercy on man who dreamed apart. God, God have pity on man apart.
Will those who come after us remember who we were except for three or four generations of family? Will there be a child who amuses herself by going through cartons of old letters in the attic? Will she draw crayon pictures of the people she reads about, showing what she imagines we were like? I'd be a fool to hope that any of my verses would remain in print. I must value them by the amusement I have in composing them. Just that, nothing more. But what happened to make me grow old so soon? When I was young I never thought of old age, of what it would be like. And why can I recall only part of some scene I'd like to relive now? Where have the lost fragments gone? As I lie wakeful in bed what I see is a long corridor of closed doors.
which is like a stock room anyway a homely City girl and I flirted, that is I skated around in front of her as she stood smiling too openly on the other side of the counter from me. A messenger came in among the clerks directly to me with a piece of rubber obviously from my car, a small piece of metal tieing it together. The police it seemed had come into possession of it and wanted me, the man said, to come and identify or take the car away. When suddenly it struck me the car was in Connecticut and wasn't here in the City at all. As I went out a salesman, in the hall which was the entrance of the store and was like the hall in a rotunda was putting up a table like at a Fair of new automobile electrical and battery items and my son had grabbed hold and wouldn't let go of these connections and I had to tear him literally by ugly strength alone away from them, ogling meanwhile the salesman in apology for this son of mine who was such a willful kid and I lifted him like stiffly up and down and bore him out the door
My face lives always in the quenchless light,  Frail gold of twilight burns across my breast,  The red dusk girds me and my limbs are pressed  In warm, wan shadows deepening down to night. My hair, red gold on brows of faultless white,  Inspires earth's children to my fatal quest;  Youth's passionate face in mortal hope of rest  Grows blind against me, wearying of my might. With ravenous lips men scourge my lustrous flesh  And crowd the quivering dusk with nameless sin;  Death takes them, still insatiate, from my mesh. Viewless, my feet pash down the one who dies,  While, sprung aloft from earth he festers in,  I watch the last-born laughing in mine eyes!
He said he was just leaving As I was just arriving, in my blue Smock, yesterday, without meaning to. Though this first sentence would Have been equally suitable For the last, for a poem made From a kitchen conversation. The air was the way it always Is in a room; books lay in ruins On the snow-cold bed. He must have been Scrubbing the floor with his toothbrush, Using his shoulder as an ashtray, From the kind of insanity running Through the American shadow furnishings. So was my shape dictated by The curved outer wall, the eccentricities Of the corridor, all sorts of untils. And I thought to myself, if he touches My sleeve even softly, whole streets Of shops near the sea will be extinguished In the most intentional darkness: If he mentions a river it will be one Renouncing the moon, that lends itself To a foreglimpse of the day's Callisthenics, stirring into animal storm, Adding a feminine ending to Whatever parts are dream. Of the place, It was godforsaken; of the season, dead; But whether it was sea or flesh, Short capsules of conscripted Cooling wax were laid like expiry Dates over partings of quite a different Cast. I said, I must find it, Using the feminine form of must, What  For four more virgin months I have been <> A sea-kitten rolling up in his English shirt like a tray of Persian Tea, neutral as a cloud. Because The  But the
Jeffrey City's Downtown Air Raid Siren creates an odd Camelotish nostalgia U-town founded 1957, pop. 750 (1979) JC's as old as the Quemoy/Matsu scare a prefab frame hamlet in midst of windswept lava beds like basecamp ville in Alaska c.b. antennas on forlorn mobes, a brown jeep buried ten ft. deep in filthy snow on A St. (heart of nowhere) Western Nuclear Red Desert Big Eagle These 3 mines are Jeffrey City's  if something as crazy as this place cd. be said to exist for a Reason
These are the poems in my head. August last year in Glastonbury and the intensity of our life there. This to be complete in under one hundred and fifty lines. The poem of the &lsquo;Mass of Shadows&rsquo; to form a considerable work and win renown among poets.  A long poem for those places I shall never see.  An acrostic on the name of one I loved and the letters of whose name are as many as the lines of a sonnet.  Also a poem to the same full of scorn yet tender.  A sonnet in the manner of Verlaine.  A poem in the manner of Jammes.
Of Empire:&ldquo;a unique princedom extending over all persons in time&rdquo; whether it is needful for the well-being of the &ldquo;world&rdquo;, whether its true authority comes from the &ldquo;people&rdquo;, whether and how &ldquo;God&rdquo; intends it The individual manhaving his own nature and truth and appropriate theretohis household outlinedin relation to groupshe finds himself infreely attending, changing, electing,or joining to carry forward the idea, the insistent phrase, the needed resonanceinto action, seeks to realize harmonies in his district (his order of life amongst the orders, savoring variety, seeking out hisspace and time, his life-style) a tuning (his appropriateness) and in the citydevelops themes coordinations,names places and times, draws perspectives,advances horizons, humanities,public works, and in the nation(thus, Olson in MAXIMUS) to initiate &ldquo;another kind of nation&rdquo;. Who are the &ldquo;people&rdquo; when &ldquo;Man&rdquo; comes into it? For &ldquo;world&rdquo; read &ldquo;Earth&rdquo; and we know well enough then what &ldquo;sin&rdquo; and &ldquo;well-being&rdquo; are. Let the meaning of &ldquo;nation&rdquo; be brought under the orders of the living.
Quick, summon up your out-of-bed persona; Start acting like you met me at a conference Ages ago. Throw in a bit of indifference. This month's adventure stars the cowboy loner, And, look, it's almost time to do something spontaneous. For all your talk of changes and the future You wouldn't dream of altering the angle Of your ponytail, relinquishing the single Newspaper life. Under that cloak of culture Your past consumes your present like a vulture. I'm flexible, but why should I adapt To being systematically ignored By somebody whose scores don't make the board? And as for warmth you might as well be wrapped In clingfilm on an isolation ward. Proud of how unemotional you are, You coast along never a peak or trough  And I'm your novelty inside a jar; You count the seconds of my wearing off, Talk about how you'd like to travel far Away from me. I hope the sea is rough. So, what's the next meticulously planned Escapade going to be? Will you expand Your consciousness, experiment with lust, Make a few notes and think you've got it sussed, The science of excitement in your hand? Well, here's goodbye. Experiment with that. You're far too big a space for me to fill, And even with the greatest strength of will I can't hallucinate a rolling hill On land that is predominantly flat.
A young man, I am on a train in Montana,  The dark late, the view Without home or horizon, the air some orange. I am talking to nobody, looking at nothing.  I have never met you. The clouds part in a west before all darkness:  A yellow hole of sundown, And through the light-parade at the cocktail hour They have on this tall train I hear coming  The name of the next town, Havre, and the immediate announcement  Of somewhere up ahead A true tornado, either to east or west: Then a little girl crying out &lsquo;Oz!&rsquo; and &lsquo;I think I  Saw it!&rsquo; a boy just said. I talk to nobody, look at nothing, I drink  Only, and I wonder: Whose horizon and is it ours it is riding Along, the lassooing Quick-As-Wind, the Witch,  The Worse-Than-Thunder? This cliffhanger turns to the cartoon cliffhanger:  The galloping in thin air, The ground gone, the drop forever, the toms Rolling until I realise and gulp,  Have to, get there.
Lying on a rock, its tendril like a hair, this trumpet vine's yellow blossom is woman at her best, or rather woman at her best is like that, trembling on a rock, wet with a few raindrops, open, offering, inviting touch or an untouching worship. I hold back, hesitate. All is so tentative, restrained. Necessarily so. And behind her, others, yellow, ecstatic. Of course we can no longer compare a woman to a yellow blossom if it makes her look helpless, tentative. All I meant to say is this : the yellow flower is beautiful. A woman is beautiful. Sometimes. Let it be.
No, not the downfall of the Western World but the wish for its downfall in an idiot mind  Dance, Baby, dance! thence springs the conflict, that it may crash hereafter; not submit and end in a burst of laughter   Cha cha, chacha, cha! to hide the defect  the difficultly held burden, to perfect! melted in a wish to die. Dance, Baby, dance the Cuban Rumba!
I meditate upon a swallow's flight, Upon an aged woman and her house, A sycamore and lime tree lost in night Although that western cloud is luminous, Great works constructed there in nature's spite For scholars and for poets after us, Thoughts long knitted into a single thought, A dance-like glory that those walls begot. There Hyde before he had beaten into prose That noble blade the Muses buckled on, There one that ruffled in a manly pose For all his timid heart, there that slow man, That meditative man, John Synge, and those Impetuous men, Shawe-Taylor and Hugh Lane, Found pride established in humility, A scene well set and excellent company. They came like swallows and like swallows went, And yet a woman's powerful character Could keep a swallow to its first intent; And half a dozen in formation there, That seemed to whirl upon a compass-point, Found certainty upon the dreaming air, The intellectual sweetness of those lines That cut through time or cross it withershins. Here, traveller, scholar, poet, take your stand When all those rooms and passages are gone, When nettles wave upon a shapeless mound And saplings root among the broken stone, And dedicate eyes bent upon the ground, Back turned upon the brightness of the sun And all the sensuality of the shade  A moment's memory to that laurelled head.
Some would say there's not much to a life lived on your street. They might say you're dumb you watch too much TV you drink too much fart and belch and laugh too loud dress funny, eat too many burgers. But tonight after work after you wash your hands eat a good meal wrestle with the dog a little after you grab a beer and sit with your family on your porch sharing a laugh with a couple neighbors while the sun sets behind the bowling alley, after a man parks his car carefully behind your Impala up on blocks and walks stiff up your driveway in his suit and briefcase and perfect hair and holds out a soft hand, you all smile at each other because no matter what he knows you're going to teach him a few things.
'A log-hut in the solitude,  A clapboard roof to rest beneath! This side, the shadow-haunted wood;  That side, the sunlight-haunted heath. At daybreak Morn will come to me  In raiment of the white winds spun; Slim in her rosy hand the key  That opes the gateway of the sun. Her smile will help my heart enough  With love to labor all the day, And cheer the road, whose rocks are rough,  With her smooth footprints, each a ray. At dusk a voice will call afar,  A lone voice like the whippoorwill's; And, on her shimmering brow one star,  Night will descend the western hills. She at my door till dawn will stand,  With gothic eyes, that, dark and deep, Are mirrors of a mystic land,  Fantastic with the towns of sleep.
So he is dead and damned and all is well.  So fare all traitors to the church and God! Cursed and cast out with candle, book and bell,  And thrust to rot beneath unhallowed sod. The mouth that sounded once Saint Mary's name  He smirched and stained with scarlet wine of lust; Therefore is he become a thing of shame,  Anathema and alien to the just. We prayed within the cloister side by side,  He chose the world, wise in his own conceit; I kept our Blessed Lady for my bride,  To paths of sin he set his wayward feet. And she is dead, too. Lies with him, they say?  Aye, lies with him they are together still  That golden girl I saw one summer day  Tending her kine upon the pasture hill. God, God, is not my blood like his blood red?  God, God, could I not see that she was fair? Did I not close my eyes and bow my head,  And purge my soul with fasting and with prayer? God, see my flesh with scourgings cut and scarred!  God, see my frame with fasting weak and thin! God, see my face with tears and sorrow marred!  God, see my soul burnt white and clean of sin! Tempted I was like him, but did not yield.  Outcast is he and damned and spit upon. Elect am I and with thine own sign sealed,  Washed white and pure in blood of Christ thy Son. And yet, and yet Ah, God, that dream last night!  When I had prayed before Thy blessed shrine, And sought to rest a while before the light  Should call me to new services of Thine. Then as I slept it seemed I was with Thee  In Heaven, and I looked down into Hell, That I the cursed souls in pain might see  And be more glad that I had served Thee well. I saw the place with blood-red flames alight,  I saw the damned and heard their shrieks and groans, And then there burst upon my eyes a sight  That turned to lead the marrow in my bones. There in his arms her soft white body lay;  Shielded by him she kissed his mouth and smiled. Round them the flames kept their unheeded sway.  Even to Hell Love made them reconciled. It's time for Mass. God bless the newborn day!  How very fair it is, and sweet and still  Down yonder lane she used to make her way  To tend her kine upon the pasture hill.
How sweet the birds of Avondale Of Avondale, of Avondale, How sweet the birds of Avondale Do swoop and swing and call. The children too of Avondale, Of Avondale, of Avondale, The boys and girls of Avondale Do swoop and swing and call, And all the little cats and dogs, Of Avondale, of Avondale, In their own way in Avondale Do swoop and swing and call, And oh it is a pleasant sight It is a very pleasant sight To see the creatures so delight To swoop and swing and call, In Avondale, in Avondale, To see them swoop and call.
Light sizzling in clay collects. The river moves the way sun shows  points in that direction. Solar water muddies the glaze of heat and its ceramics long before someone's hands. &ldquo;Tell her what the shape I'm in,&rdquo; sang Sonny Terry, sharing song with Brownie McGhee. &ldquo;I have had my fun,&rdquo; it goes, &ldquo;if I don't get well no more.&rdquo; And that, the way of all songs, can't help but be beyond the sun &amp; all the leaves it takes with it; bug-buried clay alive with ultra- violet light. Is there a night?
I will not toy with it nor bend an inch. Deep in the secret chambers of my heart I muse my life-long hate, and without flinch I bear it nobly as I live my part. My being would be a skeleton, a shell, If this dark Passion that fills my every mood, And makes my heaven in the white world's hell, Did not forever feed me vital blood. I see the mighty city through a mist  The strident trains that speed the goaded mass, The poles and spires and towers vapor-kissed, The fortressed port through which the great ships pass, The tides, the wharves, the dens I contemplate, Are sweet like wanton loves because I hate.
Find out who speaks these lines and fit your play. The answers are buried in the event. All these lines are written straight, fall tangled. Extricate. Attend: The story grows out of the saying. Or language is the only fable  and utters, utterly able. It can make a rose soar or lower flowers more than God can. Strange journeymen! We are never experts at this juggling where the balls themselves are born from upward gestures of my pretentious hands. We stand around and understand and almost anyone better than I do can.
I think of the Celts as rather a whining lady Who was beautiful once but is not so much so now She is not very loving, but there is one thing she loves It is her grievance which she hugs and takes out walking. The Celtic lady likes fighting very much for freedom But when she has got it she is a proper tyrant Nobody likes her much when she is governing. The Celtic lady is not very widely popular But the English love her oh they love her very much Especially when the Celtic lady is Irish they love her Which is odd as she hates them then more than anyone else. When she's Welsh the English stupidly associate her chiefly With national hats, eisteddfods and Old Age Pensions. (They don't think of her at all when she is Scotch, it is rather  a problem.) Oh the Celtic lady when she's Irish is the one for me Oh she is so witty and wild, my word witty, And flashing and spiteful this Celtic lady we love All the same she is not so beautiful as she was.
If underwater and glowing, a red stone is always good luck. Fish it out, even if you must wade and wet your good shoes. It will dry flat red like a new potato. You should rub it and remember the way it sparkles underwater, like a red haired woman curving troutlike through moss. A red stone will get you through divorce, rage, sudden attacks of poison and certain diseases like ringworm or gout. A red stone will not reverse Alzheimer's disease, or get you past cancer of the colon. Use it for what it can do. When it has done its work, return it softly where you found it, and let your wet feet sting a moment in the foam's white chill.
We have two candidates. They look the same. They act the same. They shake hands heartily the same. They crack jokes the same. They point a stern finger of warning the same. They have a little doggie the same. They kiss babies the same. They pass out cigars and smile the same. They play golf the same. Piano the same. They have a wife with a pretty flowered hat the same. They are a friend of labor the same. They are a champion of the free world the same. They are against war and streetwalkers and labor racketeers the same. They are against the same taxes. They are for the same taxes. They are against all special privilege the same. They are for Everybody and Everything the same. But they are not the same. Why not? Because one of them is going to be elected.
I've had it here craving for New York City every day Moving toward atmosphere like the pressure to go out stay in etc. Yes there are more new movies, people, streets and places And every morning a newspaper in your native tongue and pills too But who is dead today that we really care for? Not George Lincoln Rockwell that horrible creep what else? Today we went to Sainte-Chapelle, Notre Dame and afterwards Bought Ted Berrigan a beret and ate those terrific hotdogs With melted cheese outside the Department Store H&ocirc;tel de Ville By this time it's twelve noon and we're back in the room Later you're writing poems and I'm reading  Sitting in the Luxembourg Gardens and attacked by these great black Algerians <> Now I'm writing poems and you're reading Boswell's  Unless you're restless and taking a walk in the environs Let's contemplate postcards to Tom Clark whom we'll see in a week Or let's miss the radio and Gem Spa and speaking of them Let's go back immediately!
Now, at last, I carry nothing In my briefcase And an empty mind. In the meadow Under the chestnut tree I am a part of what I see. Swallows above the alder thicket Skim mosquitoes from the haze, And I've seceded From all committees, left My Letters to the Editor unsent No solutions, no opinions. Breathing purely Without ambitions, purged, awaiting Annunciations of the true. The wind is up now and the swallows gone. I'll listen to the chestnut tree Rustling Empty-headed in the wind.
Born beneath a troubled star, Lovelier than others are, Brighter with the flame of life, You will cause and suffer strife. Where you go there will be war; Where you walk, will walk before Flattery, and at your back Envy waiting to attack. When you look for friends you'll find Would-be lovers, hungry, blind; Whom you think you touch and pass, See! behind you in your glass: You to whom fate gave the unwise, Irremediable prize, Beauty burning, doomed to fire Too much undesired desire.
<> and nails and Roman soldiers and a dusk Golgotha? Did I see Mary, the changed woman, washing the feet of all men, clean as new grass when the old grass burns? Did I see moths in your eyes, lost moths, with a flutter of wings that meant: we can never come again. Did I see No Man's Land in your eyes and men with lost faces, lost loves, and you among the stubs crying? Did I see you in the red death jazz of war losing moths among lost faces, speaking to the stubs who asked you to speak of songs and God and dancing, of bananas, northern lights or Jesus, any hummingbird of thought whatever flying away from the red death jazz of war? Did I see your hand make a useless gesture trying to say with a code of five fingers something the tongue only stutters? did I see a dusk Golgotha?
I believe, but what is belief? I receive the forbidden dead. They appear in the mirrors of asleep To accuse or be comforted. All the selves of myself they keep, From a bodiless time arrive, Retaining in face and shape Shifting lineaments of alive. So whatever it is you are, Dear Anne, bent smilingly grave Over wine glasses filled by your fire, Is the whole of your life you gave To our fictions of what you were. Not a shadow of you can save These logs that crackle with light, Or this smoky image I have  Your face at the foot of a flight Of wrought-iron circular stairs. I am climbing alone in the night Among stabbing, unmerciful flares. Oh, I am what I see and know, But no other solid thing's there Except for the terrible glow Of your face and its quiet belief, Light wood ash falling like snow On my weaker grief.
sister, my face changes into yours then our mother always asking a question I can't understand no matter how many times I try reading our lips in the mirror. once when I answered a person I heard the voice of my father gruff and straight from the pocketbook. sister, perhaps my fears will come true and I will turn crazy in my middle age. perhaps I will inherit diabetes and board up the windows of our house muttering about Jesus. there is nothing to do but wait until the faces refuse to change back. then smiling like our retarded brother, in the middle of the house I will spill the gasoline, light the match.
Ages have passed this riddle down, Today I seek its meaning out  How, when the sapless bracken burns Unquenchable in summer's drought, A hare, lucky in liberty From farmer's gun and poacher's gin, Crouches too late upon her form While merciless nature hems her in. What holds her there? What secret bond Of earth, too old for intellect? Inscrutable powers shape her will, She bows before the fiery fact. Still, if she chose, a path lies clear Across the heath, beside the bog. Galloping there, she'd cheat her fate, Yet lies as motionless as a log. Pondering this, I muse how once Buddha, incarnate as a hare, Leapt in voluntary sacrifice Into the flames some brahmin there Had lit; and therefrom, all unharmed, Stepped forth, in glad surprise to meet Sakka, almighty arbiter, Adventuring from the holy seat. And thus was proved and justified, Purged of all grosser elements ... So legendary lore might still unlock Riddles of blind experience If heart, not head, could read that book Wherein the hieroglyphs of time Are set nature and beast and man One in the great heraldic rhyme. But no, ironic with knowledge now We witness this drama on the heath  The sieging flames, the sudden dash, The screams, the reeking fur, the death In some deep covert. Blind and dumb We stand in impotent wonder there Nor guess how our pounding pulses prove The terror and triumph of the hare.
You remember the name was Jensen. She seemed old always alone inside, face pasted gray to the window, and mail never came. Two blocks down, the Grubskis went insane. George played rotten trombone Easter when they flew the flag. Wild roses remind you the roads were gravel and vacant lots the rule. Poverty was real, wallet and spirit, and each day slow as church. You remember threadbare church groups on the corner, howling their faith at stars, and the violent Holy Rollers renting that barn for their annual violent sing and the barn burned down when you came back from war. Knowing the people you knew then are dead, you try to believe these roads paved are improved, the neighbors, moved in while you were away, good-looking, their dogs well fed. You still have need to remember lots empty and fern. Lawns well trimmed remind you of the train your wife took one day forever, some far empty town, the odd name you never recall. The time: 6:23. The day: October 9. The year remains a blur. You blame this neighborhood for your failure. In some vague way, the Grubskis degraded you beyond repair. And you know you must play again and again Mrs. Jensen pale at her window, must hear the foul music over the good slide of traffic. You loved them well and they remain, still with nothing to do, no money and no will. Loved them, and the gray that was their disease you carry for extra food in case you're stranded in some odd empty town and need hungry lovers for friends, and need feel you are welcome in the secret club they have formed.
When Mother died I thought: now I'll have a death poem. That was unforgivable yet I've since forgiven myself as sons are able to do who've been loved by their mothers. I stared into the coffin knowing how long she'd live, how many lifetimes there are in the sweet revisions of memory. It's hard to know exactly how we ease ourselves back from sadness, but I remembered when I was twelve, 1951, before the world unbuttoned its blouse. I had asked my mother (I was trembling) if I could see her breasts and she took me into her room without embarrassment or coyness and I stared at them, afraid to ask for more. Now, years later, someone tells me Cancers who've never had mother love are doomed and I, a Cancer, feel blessed again. What luck to have had a mother who showed me her breasts when girls my age were developing their separate countries, what luck she didn't doom me with too much or too little. Had I asked to touch, perhaps to suck them, what would she have done? Mother, dead woman who I think permits me to love women easily, this poem is dedicated to where we stopped, to the incompleteness that was sufficient and to how you buttoned up, began doing the routine things around the house.
A memory kissed my mind  and its courtesy hurt me. On an ancient immaculate lawn  in an English county you declared love, but from   didn't inform me that the fine hairs shadowing my lip  were a charge against me. Your hair was gods' gold, curled,  and your cricketer's body tanned as mine never would tan   when we conquered Italy in an Austin 7 convertible,  nineteen thirty; I remember its frangible spokes  and the way you taught me to pluck my unsightly moustache  with a tool you bought me. I bought us a sapphire, flawed,  (though you did repay me) from a thief on the Ponte Vecchio.  Good breeding made me share the new tent with Aileen  while you and Hartley, in the leaky, unpatchable other,  were dampened nightly. If I weren't   you told me sternly, you'd take me like a cat in heat  and never respect me. That was something I thought about  constantly, deeply, in the summer of '54, when I  fell completely for a Milanese I only met once  while tangoing, tipsy, on an outdoor moon-lit dance-floor.  I swear you lost me when he laid light fingers on my lips  and then, cat-like, kissed me.
 It's very late: it's very cold:  And you're too young and I'm too old.  You've your small cares and I've small ease.  Come nestle down across my knees.  Stir up the fire: draw out the chair,  Kick off the shoes: let down the hair:  Your white kimono now! Disclose  The little budget of your woes.  You shall have both my hands to hold:  It's very late: it's very cold. It's very cold: it's very late. The snow Lies upon all the housetops. But we two Have each of us such ancient work to do: You sell caresses: I, a song or so: And so we please each other ... Yes, I know. It's very late: it's very cold. The snow Blocks all the tram-lines. Here's a pleasant ease; Your arm-chair and a fire: curtains and peace. And, since you rest me, lying on my knees  When to my niche I'm hoisted on that day Stand up and claim your leaf of poet's bay. Do it: be bold! I shall not shun you in my memories; You shall have, then as now, a hand to hold.  It's very late: it's very cold:  You keep your bargains, I'll be bold  To say, more loyally than half the men  I'll meet to-morrow, any other when  Or any other where. My dear, that's Fate!  Run off to bed. Good-night! It's very late.
Whoever takes an arrow to this bow will really feel  the slippery sap Of the freshly-peeled sally-rod and the tensile spring  of the future slap Of the string, all imaginary targets riddled through  with past plu- Perfect hits and misses; the lucky shot of two birds  skewered in the perfect blue. All thumbs and fingers tweezerlike, I unbarbed his  fletcher's herringbone, Like I unstuck the hoops and loops of the Velcro  Celtic Twilight Zone. I unzipped it open, and so witnessed the opposing oars  of quinquereme And decked-out trireme, how they rowed majestically  into Byzantium: A shower of arrows welcomed them like needles to a  magnet, like the whole Assault of future into present, the way that the South  attracts the North pole.
Came up that cold sea at Cromer like a running grave  Beside him as he struck Wildly towards the shore, but the blackcapped wave  Crossed him and swung him back, And he saw his son digging in the castled dirt that could save.  Then the farewell rock Rose a last time to his eyes. As he cried out  A pawing gag of the sea Smothered his cry and he sank in his own shout  Like a dying airman. Then she Deep near her son asleep on the hourglass sand  Was awakened by whom Save the Fate who knew that this was the wrong time:  And opened her eyes On the death of her son's begetter. Up she flies  Into the hydra-headed Grave as he closes his life upon her who for  Life has so richly bedded him. But she drove through his drowning like Orpheus and tore  Back by the hair Her escaping bridegroom. And on the sand their son  Stood laughing where He was almost an orphan. Then the three lay down  On that cold sand, Each holding the other by a living hand.
He thinks you are a flower and cannot talk. So still standing there. Touching no one In your splendid garb. You are free. Must be. So many parts to you belonging to you. Invite him. When he takes his scissors, his eye sly, he aims to sever a stalk. How could he know you would bleed? And he would be to blame and find a lie to hide behind. Make it wide. A rock behind which to hide his face. With so many spiders underneath. Crawling out from under. <> <>
All the essentials were there, the river thin from distance in the canyon below, the house above the canyon and the old man pruning trees. Whatever he felt left out appeared, the carnival band in step on the dirt road, the road remote enough to need a name, lovely girls asking directions. The old man's house was the last one. After that, the road forever in the sun. He looked down that road every noon and nothing came mail or flashing girl. He needed a dog but that you couldn't provide. In time you gave him wisdom. A way of knowing how things are from photos. He stared long enough to make the photoed live. A farmer told him pears grew big in '97. Children danced at dawn and horses, the horses ran and ran. You let him ride one and you helped him learn which woman in one picture loved him at the Baptist fair. You joined him one day at the river. After hours of trout you walked together up the long slope where he pointed to his house. He said &lsquo;Come in&rsquo; and built a fire and you said &lsquo;I live here too.&rsquo; Some days, the road fills suddenly with clowns. The carnival band plays every tune you love. Lovely girls stream in. You are dazzled by their sequins, and the odor of their cooking makes you laugh. Other days, the road hangs empty. Not even birds can raise the dust.
<> <>  and landed you in yesterday Where everything was skew. The rainbow colours were  all out of kilter, Like oil had leaked out all over the road from a dropped  and broken philtre. There, no one wanted to be recognised, and walked  around in wrap-round Polaroids. There was Semtex in the Maxwell House,  and twenty shillings in the pound. <>  of a Pharaoh. He took my kopeck, docked it with two holes, and told  me it was time to go. All the motor-cars were black. I got behind the wheel  of one. It worked O.K. Welder's sparks zipped from the trolley. The radio  was playing karaoke.
Suddenly all the gold I ever wanted Let loose and fell on me. A storm of gold Starting with rain a quick sun catches falling And in the rain (fall within fall) a whirl Of yellow leaves, glitter of paper nuggets. And there were puddles the sun was winking at And fountains saucy with goldfish, fantails, sunfish, And trout slipping in streams it would be insult To call gold and, trailing their incandescent Fingers, meteors and a swimming moon. Flowers of course. Chrysanthemums and clouds Of twisted cool witch-hazel and marigolds, Late dandelions and all the goldenrods. And bees all pollen and honey, wasps gold-banded And hornets dangling their legs, cruising the sun. The luminous birds, goldfinches and orioles, Were gone or going, leaving some of their gold Behind in near-gold, off-gold, ultra-golden Beeches, birches, maples, apples. And under The appletrees the lost, the long-lost names. Pumpkins and squashes heaped in a cold-gold sunset  Oh, I was crushed like Croesus, Midas-smothered And I died in a maple-fall a boy was raking Nightward to burst all bonfire-gold together  And leave at last in a thin blue prayer of smoke.
Age jumped like God out of a riven pod  (O waily, waily down the grove) And fashion like a passion proved  (The beetle beareth my sun away). I am surrounded by the day  (A beacon beckoneth down the road). These glass birds, they act very odd.  (But they do not act; they  There is no world I have not loved.  (It's time to take the pain away). I have the words, but cannot say  (O help me bear my heavy load). St. Paul divulged the truth of God  (A good man is so hard to prove). I admit me that I   (In spite of all we cannot say) By your immense beauty today  (O over the moors how Cathie strode!) If Time alas! should meet us, nod  (And Time is always at remove) And raise a smile. Love is approved.  (Orpheus has earned another lay) Love can advance an infinite way  (First he had ridden: then  It's life that rules us with a rod.  (Schoolchildren's death is love above) Death itself has been reproved.  (All love is speechless, you might say) Glass birds have filled the air today  (We'll forget the gadfly
A patch provokes the lazy eye, Pillars support the dome. I say his name and friends reply <> He's a performing art on stage. At work he's smart and busy. He's Times New Roman on the page. When he's at home, who is he? He's the road atlas man in cars. On fairground rides he's dizzy. He's wet in rain and drunk in bars. When he's at home, who is he, When there is nothing that provokes And when there's no support? Nothing. The show is over, folks, And sooner than I thought.
After a week spent under raining skies,  In horror, mud and sleeplessness, a week Of bursting shells, of blood and hideous cries  And the ever-watchful sniper: where the reek Of death offends the living ... but poor dead  Can't sleep, must lie awake with the horrid sound That roars and whirs and rattles overhead  All day, all night, and jars and tears the ground; When rats run, big as kittens: to and fro  They dart, and scuffle with their horrid fare, And then one night relief comes, and we go  Miles back into the sunny cornland where Babies like tickling, and where tall white horses Draw the plough leisurely in quiet courses.
Twice, now, I've gone back there, like a part-time ghost To the wrecked houses and the blasted courts of the dream Where the freeway is pushing through. Snake country now. Rats-run  Bearable, bearable  Winos' retreat and the midnight newfound lands  Bearable, perfectly bearable  Of hungering rich lovers under the troubling moon Their condominium; bowery close; momentary kingdom come  Wild country of love that exists before the concrete Is poured. Squatters there. That's all O.K. with me. First time I went there about a year ago come Monday  I went hunting flowers: flowering bushes, flowering shrubs, flowering Years-grown-over gardens: what was transportable. What was transportable had been taken long away. Among the detritus, rock-slides, confessions, emotional moraines  Along the dream plazas and the alleys of the gone moon  Some stragglers and wildlings: poppy, sorrel, nightblooming Nothing. And found finally my own garden where it had been  A pissed-upon landscape now, full of joy-riding Beer cans and condoms all love's used up these days Empty wine bottles wrappers for synthetic bread Larkspur, lupin, lavender, lantana, linaria, lovage. <> All gone. The children's rooms have a roof of Nothing And walls of the four wild winds. And, in the rooms of the night, The true foundation and threshing floor of love, Are the scars of the rocking bed, and, on certain nights, the moon. Unending landscape ... dry ... blind robins  Blind Robins, Blind Robins Fisherman, do you take Blind Robins In the stony trough of the dry Los Angeles river? No charmed run of ale wives or swarming of holy mackerel From the pentecostal cloud chambers of the sex-charged sea, no Leaping salmon on the light-embroidered ladders of eternal redemption? Damnation of blind robins ... bacalao ... dried cod, is that Is that all you take on your dead-rod green-fishing Jonah, Poor boy, mad clean crazy lad I pulled once from this river in spate it is not Bearable. Well, wait, then. Observe. Sky-writing pigeons, their Blue unanswerable documents of flight, their Unearthly attachments. Observe: these last poor flowers, their light-shot promises, That immortality, green-signature of their blood ... Now, instantly, the concrete comes: the freeway leaps over the dead River and this once now twice-green moment into the astonished Suburbs of the imaginary city petrified Megalopolitan grief homesteads of lost angels anguish ... On this day nothing rises from the dead, the river Dying, the dry flowers going under the mechanic stone ... Sirs! Archaeologists! what will you find at that level of ancient light? Poverty destroyed sweet hearts and houses once before Progress His Engines Put down a final roof on the wild kitchens of that older Order. These lovers long are fled into the storm. The river is dry. It is finally. completely. Bearable
Your thighs are appletrees whose blossoms touch the sky. Which sky? The sky where Watteau hung a lady's slipper. Your knees are a southern breeze or a gust of snow. Agh! what sort of man was Fragonard?  as if that answered anything. Ah, yes below the knees, since the tune drops that way, it is one of those white summer days, the tall grass of your ankles flickers upon the shore  Which shore?  the sand clings to my lips  Which shore? Agh, petals maybe. How should I know? Which shore? Which shore? I said petals from an appletree.
Let us recall Mr Dagg, whatever his lineage, He showed himself a tender turnkey. There was a poet, a Mr Savage, who sometimes Lived up to his name, a troublesome bastard Of the Earl of Here and the Countess of There. His illegitimate father died of a distemper: &lsquo;I can only,&rsquo; he said, &lsquo;be a godfather to you.&rsquo; His ill-tempered mother desired to send him To the American plantations in secret. For a debt of eight pounds, owed to a Mrs Read Who managed a coffee-house, the poet was consigned To Newgate and the care of Mr Dagg, the keeper. This happened on his 45th birthday, for Mr Savage Was proficient in misfortune. Inspired perhaps by his mother, he had once written A play,  <> But little. &lsquo;But now,&rsquo; he said, &lsquo;Freely I sing In my cage, not a gaolbird but a bird of the Muses.&rsquo; &lsquo;Here,&rsquo; said Mr Savage, &lsquo;I have a room to myself.&rsquo; Moreover he fed at the keeper's own table, And often was taken for walks in the meadows. Never in his life had the poet had it so good. In his death he was buried at Mr Dagg's expense. Modern scholars contend that in fact Mr Savage Was of low and legitimate birth. There is a book On him, grudgingly titled  But the moral of the story remains unaffected: Virtue, as Dr Johnson observed, is most laudable In conditions which make it most difficult  Like being a gaoler. Mr Dagg should not be forgotten.
When I see a suckling pig turn on the spit, its mouth around an apple, or feel the soft muzzle of a horse eating a windfall from my hand, I think about the animals when Eden closed down, who stole no fruit themselves. After feeding so long from Adam's outstretched hand and sleeping under the mild stars, flank to flank, what did they do on freezing nights? Still ignorant of nests and lairs did they try to warm themselves at the fiery leaves of the first autumn? And how did they learn to sharpen fangs and claws? Who taught them the first lesson: that flesh had been transformed to meat? Tiger and Bear. Elk and Dove. God saved them places on the Ark, and Christ would honor them with parables, calling himself the Lamb of God. We train our dogs in strict obedience at which we failed ourselves. But sometimes the sound of barking fills the night like distant artillery, a sound as chilling as the bellow of steers led up the ramps of cattle cars whose gates swing shut on them, as Eden's did.
The sun has burst the sky Because I love you And the river its banks. The sea laps the great rocks Because I love you And takes no heed of the moon dragging it away And saying coldly &lsquo;Constancy is not for you&rsquo;. The blackbird fills the air Because I love you With spring and lawns and shadows falling on lawns. The people walk in the street and laugh I love you And far down the river ships sound their hooters Crazy with joy because I love you.
Some kind of gods move around in these propositions They think that to be and not to be is the same thing and not the same thing It is but it is not It is not but possibly it can be It's like the story of the god who turning back to look at the smoke eyed woman, steps on his cape and becomes a man.
All right, I was Welsh. Does it matter I spoke the tongue that was passed on To me in the place I happened to be, A place huddled between grey walls Of cloud for at least half the year. My word for heaven was not yours. The word for hell had a sharp edge Put on it by the hand of the wind Honing, honing with a shrill sound Day and night. Nothing that Glyn D&wcirc;r Knew was armour against the rain's Missiles. What was descent from him? Even God had a Welsh name: We spoke to him in the old language; He was to have a peculiar care For the Welsh people. History showed us He was too big to be nailed to the wall Of a stone chapel, yet still we crammed him Between the boards of a black book. Yet men sought us despite this. My high cheek-bones, my length of skull Drew them as to a rare portrait By a dead master. I saw them stare From their long cars, as I passed knee-deep In ewes and wethers. I saw them stand By the thorn hedges, watching me string The far flocks on a shrill whistle. And always there was their eyes&rsquo; strong Pressure on me: You are Welsh, they said; Speak to us so; keep your fields free Of the smell of petrol, the loud roar Of hot tractors; we must have peace And quietness.   Is a museum Peace? I asked. Am I the keeper Of the heart's relics, blowing the dust In my own eyes? I am a man; I never wanted the drab r&ocirc;le Life assigned me, an actor playing To the past's audience upon a stage Of earth and stone; the absurd label Of birth, of race hanging askew About my shoulders. I was in prison Until you came; your voice was a key Turning in the enormous lock Of hopelessness. Did the door open To let me out or yourselves in?
It was early May, I think a moment of lilac or dogwood when so many promises are made it hardly matters if a few are broken. My mother and father still hovered in the background, part of the scenery like the houses I had grown up in, and if they would be torn down later that was something I knew but didn't believe. Our children were asleep or playing, the youngest as new as the new smell of the lilacs, and how could I have guessed their roots were shallow and would be easily transplanted. I didn't even guess that I was happy. The small irritations that are like salt on melon were what I dwelt on, though in truth they simply made the fruit taste sweeter. So we sat on the porch in the cool morning, sipping hot coffee. Behind the news of the day  strikes and small wars, a fire somewhere  I could see the top of your dark head and thought not of public conflagrations but of how it would feel on my bare shoulder. If someone could stop the camera then ... if someone could only stop the camera and ask me: are you happy? perhaps I would have noticed how the morning shone in the reflected color of lilac. Yes, I might have said and offered a steaming cup of coffee.
<> They prize the world's poor business more than peace. 2 They have no virtue but their looks. Encrusting 1 their speech with filth, they are senilities.  2 Waiting for age to make him less uncouth 3 he dared condemn, too harshly, their conceit;  4 and, blaming their inevitable youth,   3 condemned himself as well, and owns defeat. 4 That clown, incarcerate beyond release 2 in the dark, floorless cell of self-distrusting1 foregoes remorse, dies by austerities 2 and suffers Hell, that I may face my feet 4 from amphitheatred towns of antique ease2 toward desert fastnesses whence brute truth stalks abroad.(3
I lie here thinking of you:  the stain of love is upon the world! Yellow, yellow, yellow it eats into the leaves, smears with saffron the horned branches that lean heavily against a smooth purple sky! There is no light only a honey-thick stain that drips from leaf to leaf and limb to limb spoiling the colors of the whole world  you far off there under the wine-red selvage of the west!
Where is the taxi's plastic pyramid? Wasting another evening in the shed. The case you carry never does or did succeed in putting motives in your head. Nobody has enough of anything, nor will they find it underneath the lid of some enamelled box, coiled in a spring in the settee that festers on the ranch, which was where I used to balance my peanut butter, or in the tree you study branch by branch or in the stadium or in the gutter. You talk of nature and the man-made world but miss the boot-sale and the avalanche. Hair that alternately is crimped and curled (if hair is not enough, what hope has skin?) has not been known to drag you from the screen, and is your bottle really worth the spin if punts and parents jointly intervene? Is God distinguished from the latest cult? Not if you run your life by maximin: aim for the least obnoxious worst result. My main objection isn't that you wait but that impatience would achieve far more. If early wasn't running into late I could respect the things you waited for. Meanwhile I must conclude you're not the one, watching you lift the packing from the crate, looking for relics of ancestral fun.
I grew up in a village: now it's almost a city. People came from the city, wanting something simple, something better for the children. Clean air; nearby a little stable. All the streets named after sweethearts or girl children. Our house was gray, the sort of place you buy to raise a family. My mother's still there, all alone. When she's lonely, she watches television. The houses get closer together, the old trees die or get taken down. In some ways, my father's close, too; we call a stone by his name. Now, above his head, the grass blinks, in spring, when the snow has melted. Then the lilac blooms, heavy, like clusters of grapes. They always said I was like my father, the way he showed contempt for emotion. They're the emotional ones, my sister and my mother. More and more my sister comes from the city, weeds, tidies the garden. My mother lets her take over: she's the one who cares, the one who does the work. To her, it looks like country  the clipped lawns, strips of colored flowers. She doesn't know what it once was. But I know. Like Adam, I was the firstborn. Believe me, you never heal, you never forget the ache in your side, the place where something was taken away to make another person.
Shall I despise you that your colourless tears Made rainbows in your lashes, and you forgot to weep? Would we were half so wise, that eke a grief out By sitting in the dark, until we fall asleep. I only fear lest, being by nature sunny, By and by you will weep no more at all, And fall asleep in the light, having lost with the tears The colour in the lashes that comes as the tears fall. I would not have you darken your lids with weeping, Beautiful eyes, but I would have you weep enough To wet the fingers of the hand held over the eye-lids, And stain a little the light frock's delicate stuff. For there came into my mind, as I watched you winking the tears down, Laughing faces, blown from the west and the east, Faces lovely and proud that I have prized and cherished; Nor were the loveliest among them those that had wept the least.
<> Foreborne in Adam's bliss, The whim of a dream on fire Has brought the world to this: Foregone was the break of order, Ere the Will was disobeyed And the Angel at Eden's border Stood with a flaming blade. This was at the beginning  What shall it be at the end! For the first child borne in sinning Will God or Nature befriend? Eve's desire is yet burning Fair women in country and town, And Adam's bliss is turning Empires and kingdoms down. Is this the worth of a story, Is this the dream of a song  A fabled blare of glory, This battle of right and wrong? O sweet, fair body of woman, O strong, brave will of man  Co-equal in the human, Unequal in the plan! The deeds of warriors vanish, The words of martyrs die, But never the heart can banish The drift of Helen's sigh. Jerusalem is forsaken, Gomorrah is a lure  Eve, once from her sleep awaken, And Adam's kiss is sure. But God is yet the Master, The dramatist of the play; If He wove an act of disaster, He wove an act to allay. Deep in the dream's forebeing The Artist was greater than life Who smiled at His own foreseeing The Virgin mother and wife.
The sea is known to those who sail it while those who long for it and weep distort to hate their own salt, small and incapable of round horizons. Song of the sea away from sea engulfs the mouth it drowns in. Who can be happy without cause to sing? Even in dreams the waters part, open up all the way one way, diaspora, dust to dust. Some of us give our lives to study the rate at which an animal can unlearn fear and fall asleep to dream we dream. Tonight I will to lie down in my native, palpitating port, to fill the chill dome of the mind with murmuring, subdued old florid story of the blood, repeated, wet vow and lament.
Into the eye of my world   Falls, glinting, the light of my father. Never again shall I doubt   That the crown I can feel is intended But for Phaeton his son,   I, pride of the fabulous morning. Warm in my room I await   The procession of brightening beauties: She at their head who will hope;   She, fair, who will pray to no purpose; She near the end who'll be flung   On the cold yellow coast of the jealous; Soft and unique at the end   Sighs she who is fit for Phaeton. Cold in the day I will stare   At the clouds that have gathered for nothing, Nothing but murmur and doubt   At the power and pain of my coming, Melting the solemn away,   I, son of all light and all loving! Where are the arrogant now?   Where, when, will they suffer Phaeton? Hurt in the night I can hear   Hooves, falls in the chase of my heartbeat. I am the one who will loom   As a tower at the end, though my wishes Whiten the world like a star:   Clouds, enemies, rivals, tremble! Out of the night I will ride,   Burning bright through the eye of my father. Watch me until I am gone,   Friend. Watch me forever, and after.
To bring about safe passage to the States and back, when taken from its sleeve or pouch this gift sits where it should, tucked like a gun inside the holster of a pocket, snug against the leg or thigh or buttock, but more suitably it fits the chest, the breast, top left inside a jacket, where it feels like armour plating or a sheriff's shield. Good going for a little silver tin: convex, concave, reflective on the out and on the in. Misplaced, but then again not knowing one malt from the next it's gin that I'll be swigging, tipping to the lips or sipping from the thimble of its lid. I have a watch, map, toothbrush, cards and cash, a licence, permit, pass, a ticket going Eastern Seaboard, Central, Mountain and Pacific, and a hip flask: tailored, weighed and measured, worked both ways, this present made to hide the heart and hold the heart in place.
<> of brown-eyed Susans dripping yellow leaves in July, I read your heart in a book. And your mouth of blue pansy I know somewhere I have seen it rain-shattered. And I have seen a woman with her head flung between her naked knees, and her head held there listening to the sea, the great naked sea shouldering a load of salt. And the blue pansy mouth sang to the sea: <> <> <> And the sea shouldered its salt in long gray combers hauling new shapes on the beach sand.
There's a gay girl laughing  For pleasure of the sky, Oh, laughing low and tenderly  In love of soft-breathed sigh Of wind and greying shadows,  That incorporeal lie Across sun-ardent grasses  Where bird wings poise and fly. There's a woman very sorrowful  As empty days go by, Uncounted hours watched hopelessly  By heart too hurt to cry; There's a gay girl laughing  For joy of earth and sky, And a woman dumbly sorrowful,  Who am I ... Who am I ..
abt the dead he sd he was going to write an obit about those americans, dead, who had shaped the world, he sd, with a more than heavy hand now she sd, looking up at the bomb like it was a bird got between her and the sun I don't know what she sd about Grant Phil Whalen insisted San Francisco 1957 that everything I ever sd she sdBut abt Grant I sd Butcher I read Kenneth Williams on Grant I feel Grant more days in more of those fall-ins where the glue, it feels, of the creation is all that holds anything back? The next turn of the wheel, what do you think about the next turn of the wheel?
I know him. He is the almost anonymous, the one with the near perfect alibi, the face over us that lacks nothing but an expression. He is the shape in the mist on the mountain we would ascend disintegrating as we compose it. He can outpace us in our pursuit, outdistancing time only to disappear in a black hole. He acknowledges our relationship in the modes of thought repudiating, when we would embody thought in language, a syntactical compulsion to incorporate him in the second person.
the universe that turned in on itself turned in on itself on itself self was was the universe that was turned in it was the universe that was turned in the universe that was turned in turned in got seven seven days days it it spent turning spent turning over days it spent turning over a new leaf the universe that turned over a new leaf turned over a new leaf new leaf leaf lived lived in the arms in the arms of the eternal it lived in the arms of the eternal return
Town or poem, I don't care how it looks. Old woman take my hand and we'll walk one more time these streets I believed marked me weak beneath catcalling clouds. Long ago, the swamp behind the single row of stores was filled and seeded. Roses today where Toughy Hassin slapped my face to the grinning delight of his gang. I didn't cry or run. Had I fought him I'd have been beaten and come home bloody in tears and you'd have told me I shouldn't be fighting. Wasn't it all degrading, mean Mr. Kyte sweeping the streets for no pay, believing what he'd learned as a boy in England: &lsquo;This is your community&rsquo;? I taunted him to rage, then ran. Is this the day we call bad mothers out of the taverns and point them sobbing for home, or issue costumes to posturing clowns in the streets, make fun of drunk barbers, and hope someone who left and made it returns, vowed to buy more neon and give these people some class? The Dugans aren't worth a dime, dirty Irish, nor days you offered a penny for every fly I killed. You were blind to my cheating. I saw my future certain  that drunk who lived across the street and fell in our garden reaching for the hoe you dropped. All he got was our laughter. I helped him often home when you weren't looking. I loved some terrible way he lived in his mind and tried to be decent to others. I loved the way we loved him behind our disdain. Clouds. What glorious floating. They always move on like I should have early. But your odd love and a war taught me the world's gone evil past the first check point and that's First Avenue South. I fell asleep each night safe in love with my murder. The neighbor girl plotted to tease every tomorrow and watch me turn again to the woods and games too young for my age. We never could account for the python cousin Warren found half starved in the basement of Safeway. It all comes back but in bites. I am the man you beat to perversion. That was the drugstore MacCameron flipped out in early one morning, waltzing on his soda fountain. The siren married his shrieking. His wife said, &ldquo;We'll try again, in Des Moines.&rdquo; You drove a better man into himself where he found tunes he had no need to share. It's all beginning to blur as it forms. Men cracking up or retreating. Resolute women deep in hard prayer. And it isn't the same this time. I hoped forty years I'd write and would not write this poem. This town would die and your grave never reopen. Or mine. Because I'm married and happy, and across the street a foster child from a cruel past is safe and need no longer crawl for his meals, I walk this past with you, ghost in any field of good crops, certain I remember everything wrong. If not, why is this road lined thick with fern and why do I feel no shame kicking the loose gravel home?
What was wrong with the day, doubtless, Was less the unseasonable gusty weather Than the bells ringing on a Monday morning For a church-feast that nobody could welcome  Not even the bell-ringers. The pond had shrunk: its yellow lilies Poked rubbery necks out of the water. I paused and sat down crossly on a tussock, My back turned on the idle water-beetles That would not skim, but floated. A wasp, a humble-bee, a blue-fly Unco&ouml;peratively at work together Were sucking honey from the crowded blossom Of a pale flower whose name someone once told me  Someone to be mistrusted. But, not far off, our little cow-herd Made mud-cakes, with one eye on the cattle, And marked each separate cake with his initials. I was half-tempted by the child's example To rescue my spoilt morning.
Arrived midday and it felt like heaven. Just the sun, the sea, and the trace of jets across the sky. Sorted out the test roster and Greg has worked wonders with the lean-to. This is the real thing. Sailed over to the old American DEW station today and hung a college scarf on what's left of the mast. Noel is an oddity. Hasn't spoken a word in two days. He's a big bloke but I think I could handle him. Took the first test this afternoon. Picked a catena from the summit to the isthmus on the east side. Even the yttrium samples are straight out of the text book. Watched the dawn again. Wish we'd brought a football. Greg has asthma. Bloody fool. Never mentioned it to the faculty and now we're stuck with him. Everyone is edgy. I spilt coffee in the variometer which kind of evens everything up, I guess. Hoar frost yesterday and the first snow this morning. Both soil augers have snapped and I fought with Greg over the food rations. I think we've patched it up which is more than I can say for the inflatable. More snow. Noel has cleared off with the one-man tent. Saw him today on the plateau throwing snowballs at the skuas and shouting at aeroplanes. We must be under a flight path. Didn't sleep at all last night. Greg was wheezing like an old dog and the sleeping bags are sopping. Woke up to find the drinking water had frozen. Today is my birthday. Thought about Hilary. Went outside this morning and saw Noel pissing on the outboard motor. Is he nuts or what? Anyway, tomorrow is the last day and I don't care if he doesn't come back. Where the hell is he sleeping? Had a cooked breakfast. Caught up with the reports and Greg even swept out the lean-to. He's done well, considering. As soon as the Vespucci docks I'll explain the situation. Tell them about these two. Rotten stinking bastards. Probably haven't left Resolute with the zoologists yet. I'll kill Turner, the bastard. Finished the last of the food and resigned ourselves to another night of this. Still no sign of Noel. Sat on the summit all day almost praying for the sight of the ship coming into the skyline. Nothing. What can I tell Greg. I'm watching him now walking back up from the bay. I think he's been washing his hair. Sometimes when the wind rattles through the awning we imagine the traces of strong, familiar voices calling our names. Our names. This is serious. At night we listen for the sea freezing over.
It's spring again and that crazy robin is back from the south for the third year bashing her beak on my window every morning for an hour or moreshe perches on the limbs of the linden tree on the terrace then bullets her- self against the glass what does she wantwhy does she do it what is her obsession (it hasn't anything to do with food or nesting) it's just self-torment each day until she is exhausted. It's spring again and the famous German film direc- tor is back in New York hunting for a distribut- or for his latest cruel bitter cynical picture the cruelty of man to man the way that men and wom- en cut each other up and then come back for more the mercilessness of fate (yes those whom the gods love they hurt the most) why do I keep on going to see that wretched gen- ius's filmsam I a charac- ter from old Menander's play The Self-Tormentor?
Here is a tale for men and women teachers: There was a girl who'd ceased to be a maiden; Who walked by night with heart like Lilith's laden; A child of sin anathemaed of preachers. She had been lovely once; but dye and scarlet, On hair and face, had ravaged all her beauty; Only her eyes still did her girl-soul duty, Showing the hell that hounded her poor harlot! One day a fisherman from out the river Fished her pale body, (like a branch of willow, Or golden weed) self-murdered, drowned and broken:  The sight of it had made a strong man shiver;  And on her poor breast, as upon a pillow, A picture smiled, a baby's, like some token.
Hear the finger of God, that has fixed the pole of the heavens. There the Pleiades spin, and Orion, that great hunter. Stars silver the night, where Hercules moves with Arcturus. Spawning systems amaze: they respond to an ordered music. Ultimate distance vibrates, close to that intimate string. Stoop, for nothing can weigh the inscrutable movement of beech leaves Silken, of brightest green, which May has transfigured like music Born of their trumpet-like buds; this movement, ever so little, Hangs on a leaf-hidden breath, so near to the nest of the greenfinch; Nothing so secret as this, under the shadows of Spring. Love, your measure is full: the stars of infinite distance, Needing the shade of a bird to knit our time to the timeless, Fell to-night through the dusk. Ear close to the ground-root, I listened, Feeling the sunlight fall through May's untranslatable evening; Then, upon earth, my pulse beat with the pulse of the dead. Guests go into the house. On the floor, attended by shadows, Late I can hear one walk, a step, and a fruitful silence. Touch, finger of Wine, this well of crystalline water And this earthenware jug, that knows the language of silence; Touch, for darkness is near, that brings your glory to bed.
You may have known it: when the sun burns between the eyes And the huge posters seem about to fall upon you With their fleshy load of cinema women.  The white walls are bright And ghastly. And there seems to be unusual dysentery Among the lower orders. When nothing may be ignored And so much must be condoned. And you would like to cry, But the tram is full of people, mostly fat and wet. You crawl along the cruel Corniche, crowded with klaxons  and feet; Big cars, full of staring eyes, at speed to create a draught And terror among walkers, dragging chains of heat. Big cars Skimming the amenable sea as it acts its blue deceitful part. Yet you may find, at evening, your happy ending,  when the sea is honest, Since no one of importance watches it, and it stirs Like molten lead, under a small and perfect moon, Now placid and dull, now nervous and bright, changing Like mercury, a message from the older gods: Rest, Rest your eyes here, wash them in these beneficent waters,  they are very old, but very good.
O you away high there, you that lean From amber lattices upon the cobalt night, I am below amid the pine trees, Amid the little pine trees, hear me! &ldquo;The jester walked in the garden.&rdquo; Did he so? Well, there's no use your loving me That way, Lady; For I've nothing but songs to give you. I am set wide upon the world's ways To say that life is, some way, a gay thing, But you never string two days upon one wire But there'll come sorrow of it. And I loved a love once. Over beyond the moon there, I loved a love once, And, may be, more times, But she danced like a pink moth in the shrubbery. Oh, I know you women from the &ldquo;other folk,&rdquo; And it'll all come right, O' Sundays. &ldquo;The jester walked in the garden.&rdquo; Did he so?
The Wishing Well was a spring bubbling clear and soundless into a shallow pool less than three feet across, a hood of rocks protecting it, smallest of grottoes, from falling leaves, the pebbles of past wishes peacefully underwater, old desires forgotten or fulfilled. No one threw money in, one had to search for the right small stone. This was the place from which year after year in childhood I demanded my departure, my journeying forth into the world of magical cities, mountains, otherness the place which gave what I asked, and more; to which still wandering, I returned this year, as if to gaze once more at the face of an ancient grandmother. And I found the well filled to the shallow brim with debris of a culture's sickness  with bottles, tins, paper, plastic  the soiled bandages of its aching unconsciousness. Does the clogged spring still moisten the underlayer of waste? Was it children threw in the rubbish? Children who don't dream, or dismiss their own desires and toss them down, discarded packaging? I move away, walking fast, the impetus of so many journeys pushes me on, but where are the stricken children of this time, this place, to travel to, in Time if not in Place, the grandmother wellspring choked, and themselves not aware of all they are doing-without?
Tremulous out of that long darkness, how Wast thou, O blossom, made Upon the wintry bough? What drew thee to appear, Like a thought in the mind, Ignorant, unafraid, And perfect? Yet the wind Blew on thee how sharp! how drear The drops fell from the sudden-clouded spring! Those delicate rare petals, all storm-thrilled, Shone into recollection, when my ear From a half-opened door was filled With a voice singing; floating up to sing A song, long ago from a heart's darkness born And upon young lips born again; A voice, flowering clear In beauty stolen from the world of pain. Ah, not to-night of beauty I thought, Yet beautiful beyond all hope's desire, O wonderful, more wonderful to me Than any miracle of beauty wrought Was my Love's voice, saying beside the fire, Where she leaned by my knee, Dear, broken words; words of no art, And yet in them was all my want, I found; Life has no more to give than that sweet sound Breaking and melting deep in my heart's heart.
With a stick in the hot dust I draw a tenement, a plane, a church: my country we have no <> where a barren wife gave birth they pat the sackcloth,  while hens peck round the sleeping kids and someone coughs, coughs.  Hunkered in the mean shade of our compound walls:  <> nothing, their constant feet. At noon, the murderous heat, I clang the gate:  Perhaps in my heart of hearts I lack compassion. I lie hot nights on a straight bed, watch crowded stars through mosquito mesh and talk to Jesus. Moonlight strikes our metal gate like a silent gong. Sometimes I wake to a dog's yelp, a screech of owl, sometimes, a wide-eyed girl hugely wrapped in shawls.  I walk a fine line with the headman, write home:  because I believe in these Lazarus' huts are secret believers; and listen in village lanes of bones and dung for Jesus' name among the shouts, the bleating goats, the bursts of dirty laughter.
But among the broken glasses and the ticking of the gramophone, From the divans where sex spread an odour of late last night Disturbing the collection of fashionable periodicals, yes  Life like Aphrodite rises; Scattering tomorrows and shattering yesterdays, rises, Rises from the cushions on which my youth has died,  Promising impossible prizes She dares me to swear that she is the one who will die. But I shall take her through the autumnal orchards Where apples like dried worms dangle from the branches; Or to the cornfield where the barking tractor has Shorn off the glory of auburn July: or show her The waiter magpie yesterday picking up tanners Now dead on my lawn, a gorgeous mess of feathers.  But she will lift her hand Defeating funerals with a mere flourish of fingers. What cyst of poison drips on to my heart that So soon the mad spectacle of monstrosities in motion Turns to a carnival, all joy and light, in a moment?  I regard the neutral stars Now casting their chaplet of light on the Channel, Spangling my trees with October's prophecies:  O pirouetting Pavlovas Who fill heaven with the dying Swans of Peace! Also my Hibernian heart, gone with the winter swallow Returns with the first imitation May morning and poises Improvising too happy rhapsodies upon my shoulders,  Gulled at Time's feint: So I spring up in April joy from December, As over my head I hear the dancers of fata morgana Clashing their tambourines in anticipation:  Tomorrow is carnival. Thus alternate day and dark that when I lie Like evening Venus naked on the fall of day, Life is false planes shimmering in shadows To which I fade when sleep shuts down my shade.  O bogus fire Like the gold glow-worm guiding me to dangers I'll be the moth who finds a phoenix in fire:  My to be dead desire. If I could penetrate future with a false alarm,  Whom should I raise from lazybone tombs  But those whom I most love and most harm? No, for I should bring to them other times,  The remembrance of remoter themes;  I could not so dazzle with their dreams  My eternal yearners for other homes.
Play the blues for me. Play the blues for me. No other music 'Ll ease my misery. Sing a soothin' song. Said a soothin' song, Cause the man I love's done Done me wrong. Can't you understand, O, understand A good woman's cryin' For a no-good man? Black gal like me, Black gal like me 'S got to hear a blues For her misery.
&ldquo;You're beautiful,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;I love you.&rdquo; I met him half an hour ago but he was and I did  there were above a hundred thousand people at the party and he was a bar-tender. &ldquo;Am I?&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;I don't know what to say &rdquo; Since he didn't know me at all he could hardly know that I was serious, that I hoped he would be happy as he no doubt deserved because of his blue eyes and flowing hair; and I wished that I could be one who would make him happy. I entertained even the wan idea that I too in being one to make him happy might be happy. Instead I gave him my little lecture on how to live cheaply in Hawaii which isn't where I am going and I kissed him despairingly on the mouth and he said good-bye. &ldquo;Maybe,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;we'll see each other another time.&rdquo; What did he mean by that?
I saw three trees beside a storm  and three crows in a cloud. It was as if I saw three souls  rise each from its dead form. The claws of October lightning  snatched as to catch them up out of dark cloud and pick and whip  those three souls on the wing. But up in ascension through the dark  those crows and souls breasted higher and higher and never rested  like the upward sorrowing spark. The three trees still stand, now the storm  and lightning claws are gone. But neither they nor I shall ever  see those three crows again.
Scales are evenly  weighed, inside outside. Light is  evenly poised  blur to the gold  glare to the blue  it's twilight.  In two minds. Who can read by  a lamp, focus land's outline?  But blue soon sinks and gold  rises. Who can stay the balance  if light can't?
This is what I want  to be back again with the night to come  slipper-bags across our saddles how fast we rode and all for nothing. Your lips on his lips your hand in his hand as you went from the dance. We heard Mass at dawn, When I knelt for communion it was the hem of your white dress I felt in my mouth, it was your lips moving. This is all I want to be there again with the night to come  meet me where the fire lights the bayou watch my sweat shine as I play for you. It is for you I play my voice leaping the flames, if you don't come I am nothing.
After years of absence he rolled home, new wife in tow, child too, his pockets stuffed with bills enough, in his family's eyes, to make him rich. The language, like his old shirt, still fit, following contours of daily meaning. He relaxed into nuance and tense, found words the way he knew each turn in the old town, streets etched in mind and only the odd glitch to remind of time intervening  grayed heads, worn carpets in the cramped rooms where new children giggled over games, their history and slang no longer his. His mother rested her hand on his arm. He wanted never to have left and to be gone.
In youth I thought I could live without pleasure as the stones live their being; they do not need pleasure for bait. Well I've none now. Pleasure? There is no pleasure. I have grown old. My wife has died, I can never see her again, nor speak to her; my dogs have died. My friends, if I ever had any friends, have died. Let me lie under ocean-surf, like the cold stones. But I lied when I said I have no pleasure. There is on the lowest level, lower than animal, The pleasure of drinking whiskey, and to watch the world Totter above its grave, and to hear the madmen Who direct nations I do not say that I could do it More wisely; I say the world's on a precipice edge Where every act, forward or backward, is fatal, And wise counsel's a fool. I enjoy that a little. Perhaps the other animals will make a new world When mankind's out. There is a higher pleasure: To lie among the cold stones my older brothers God knows I am old enough, But not like granite to lie quietly embarnacled Under the film of surf and look at the sky. I strain the mind to imagine distances That are not in man's mind: the planets, the suns, the galaxies, the super-galaxies, the incredible voids And lofts of space: our mother the ape never suckled us For such a forest: The vastness here, the horror, the mathematical unreason, the cold awful glory, The inhuman face of our God: It is pleasant and beautiful.
<> Tea-roses, dead of bloom; An invalid, she sits there in the gloom, And contemplates her doom. The pattern of the paper, and the grain Of carpet, with its stain, Have stamped themselves, like fever, on her brain, And grown a part of pain. It has been long, so long, since that one died, Or sat there by her side; She felt so lonely, lost, she would have cried,  But all her tears were dried. A knock came on the door: she hardly heard; And then a whispered word, And someone entered; at which, like a bird, Her caged heart cried and stirred. And then she heard a voice; she was not wrong: <> She listened, while the silence filled with song  Oh, she had waited long! She dared not turn to see; she dared not look; But slowly closed her book, And waited for his kiss; could scarcely brook The weary time he took. There was no one remembered her no one! But him, beneath the sun.  <> Her whose long work was done. She raised her eyes, and no one! Yet she felt A presence near, that smelt Like faded roses; and that seemed to melt Into her soul that knelt. She could not see, but  Smoothing her hands and hair; Filling with scents of roses all the air, Standing beside her chair. [....] And so they found her, sitting quietly, Her book upon her knee, Staring before her, as if she could see  What was it Death? or he?
The three temples are like things with roots that channel the weather into bedrock and pulse with a low frequency way under earshot earth rumours back into the stratosphere. The uttermost limit of the Grand Tour, its point of exhaustion and refreshment, the travertine stonework rises like a shimmering wall of sea although the sea and its god have withdrawn from sight behind the polished cubits of the perimeter wall leaving the harbour stranded. Malaria filled the spaces where the sea had been, and shifting trade-routes and the tilt of power and a black rain of lapilli left this stone unroofed and tenantless, the haunt by day of jackdaws and by night of owls. Snakes that pose under the famous roses at the edge of wedding photos last year claimed a satin bride for Dis. The Doric columns tower in TV adverts and tourist brochures while the triglyphs still grip the entablature like talons. On the diver's tomb in the museum earth swells and might as well be water under the silent leap of the diver  his body finding itself in mid-flight suddenly supple again and childlike, arched, his weight assumed by air which any moment might spring wide like the Sea Gate onto a burning source.
when all it has done for us this last year is dawdle in rain water smeared on the windscreen or glisten carelessly across drying flagstones. Take the week of the cottage in Anglesey: just one afternoon to speak of when we flopped like synchronised seals into Red Wharf Bay. Then the drizzle came, the swingball splattered like a dishcloth and a bike ride to Moelfre blackened our spines with a plume of dirt. After three sticky nights we called it a day. Take the camping weekend under Malham Cove: drunk with the effort of filling the air-beds we saw stars spangle in the one-man tent. Then we slept with a thunderstorm drum-rolling over us, and dreamt of everlasting happiness as we drifted apart on the waterlogged groundsheet. Take the walk along the Humber Bridge with the wind nagging the high-tension cables. All we had to time the distance to the waves was a spent match, and you told me to drop it. Admittedly, there was one evening; mackerel sky, the laburnum apparently cascading with yellow and a breath of air almost saying something through the trellis. But why write of whispering when all we ever did that year was shout.
is not an eye for seeing with; mahogany, smoked glass, globed wing mirror that inflects a world of sound, scent, measures the speed of flight against a veld, the deer's eye is unchanging: a spirit-lamp that does not guide but follows where the will goes, its level never changing not even in a flat-out run slow-motion disentangles into splits, vaulted, folded, or at dusk when those two lamps burn as sight fades, dawn when they catch the limb of a gibbous moon, obscuring, reflecting or radiant to the point flame dies, light implodes. To bring the deer's eye level with your own, across bedclothes, nightroom, like a newsreel, thriller, brings you where you should not be: unbeliever in a temple, voyeur in a playground, armed, defended in an arena where fight/flight is a bolt through grass, judder of a shin, gold of an eye with a pupil, dark of an eye without, its intelligence within. To cheat this eye, steal from it  be it with awe, tenderness  intimacy, sensation, the right to draw our metaphors, superimpose, magnified, our vision on an eye that cannot see its own death filmed, is to justify lives we cannot change, lives that, left unchanged, themselves change nothing.
The gods sat in the trees that evening, green and darkening, lingering over a last coffee, coffee with a shot of rum. The river was talking to them but they were gods and didn't have to listen. Even in the trees it was hot that night. The leaves were not delightful as they knew how to be. The gods stirred in the trees, they looked away. The river was talking to them more urgently. &ldquo;I don't want this,&rdquo; it said. &ldquo;I don't need it.&rdquo; But the gods had worked enough that day. And the evening was so hot the little mortal flung himself into the water. Inside the house beside the river, someone talked on the telephone. Someone wrote in a notebook. The windows were just openings no one happened to look through. The hands on the clock lurched forward forever.
Still clear, that morning his family moved, The lorry carrying furniture and people Towards Swansea. I never waved But breathed at the window the sweet-stale Air of the empty house. And walked home. If there was grief I have forgotten it, But from then on things were not the same. Grammar-school, homework, rugby-kit Filled my time. I learned to become Invisible and wrote the days&rsquo; timetable In an exercise book. My uniform Had a heart-shaped badge and its black wool Steamed in the rain. We were all proud. And seven years passed like the days&rsquo; Seven lessons and he slowly dwindled From my mind, a small ghost who preys Now suddenly but for good reason On imagination and memory. It was never repeated, that season Of friendship: a ten-year-old boy With mad eyes, a truant, a sleeper-out In haystacks brought down his fist With a cobble in it and a gout Of blood fell like a grape into the dust. Fear and learning; deliberate Childish violence. Like steel and flint We sparked each other to the great Discovery of ourselves. And went Our ways. Children with their tough minds Would understand. Seeing my blood Did not scare us. It ran for the parting of friends. We both knew we were going away for good.
Likeness has made them animal and shy. See how they turn their full gaze left and right, Seeking the other, yet not moving close; Nothing in their relationship is gross, But soft, conspicuous, like giraffes. And why Do they not speak except by sudden sight? Sisters kiss freely and unsubtle friends Wrestle like lovers; brothers loudly laugh: These in a dreamier bondage dare not touch. Each is the other's soul and hears too much The heartbeat of the other; each apprehends The sad duality and the imperfect half. The one lay sick, the other wandered free, But like a child to a small plot confined Walked a short way and dumbly reappeared. Is it not all-in-all of what they feared, The single death, the obvious destiny That maims the miracle their will designed? For they go emptily from face to face, Keeping the instinctive partnership of birth A ponderous marriage and a sacred name; Theirs is the pride of shouldering each the same The old indignity of Esau's race And Dromio's denouement of tragic mirth.
I am tired of angels, of how their great wings rustle open the way a curtain opens on a play I have no wish to see. I am tired of their milky robes, their star-infested sashes, of their perfect fingernails translucent as shells from which the souls of tiny creatures have already fled. Remember Lucifer, I want to tell them, his crumpled bat wings nose-diving from grace. But they would simply laugh with the watery sound a harp makes cascading through bars of music. Or they would sing to me in my mother's lost voice, extracting all the promises I made to her but couldn't keep.
When blackguards and murderers under cover of their offices accuse the world of those villainies which they themselves invent to torture us  but to bend to their designs, buck them or be trampled while our thoughts gnaw, snap and bite  within us helplessly unless we learn from that  being as they are, how love will rise out of its ashes if we water  stem and keep the image of its lively flower chiseled upon our minds.
His last train home is Purgatory in reverse, A spiral back into time and down towards Hell Clutching a quizzical strap where wraiths of faces Contract, expand, revolve, impinge; disperse On a sickly wind which drives all wraiths pell-mell Through tunnels to their appointed, separate places, And he is separate too, who had but now ascended Into the panarchy of created things Wearing his halo cocked, full of good will That need not be implemented; time stood still As the false coin rang and the four walls had wings And instantly the Natural Man was mended. Instantly and it would be permanently God was uttered in words and gulped in gin, The barmaid was a Madonna, the adoration Of the coalman's breath was myrrh, the world was We And pissing under the stars an act of creation While the low hills lay purring round the inn. Such was the absolute moment, to be displaced By moments; the clock takes over time to descend Where Time will brief us, briefed himself to oppress The man who looks and finds Man human and not his friend And whose tongue feels around and around but cannot taste That hour-gone sacrament of drunkenness.
<> Near leafy mingle, in cove of air, Space, by our moving, flows across Meadow to shadow, and softly, there Evening birds exchange by rote Perfected oddments, echo-pure. I hear them open on one note Serene, secure. No hurt retreats us from this calm, Now fragile, and so seasonal. Here, healing as the scriptural balm In Gilead, affirms the small Invisible thrush with delicate throat  Where we delay or return to hear it  Of which the importunate psalmist wrote For the broken spirit.
Certain poets have written good poems surely because of their passion for girls drawing on their coats I know at least one who benefited seeing how that night she drew on her scarf and the coat held for her going out after a party not only into the cold but into all the years and all the arms of her years and into the snow and the time to cover her But I merely mutter disconsolate sighs and sip the evening's last pale glass wondering how far the fat boy's hands have plowed by now
Wader, Watcher by water, Walker alone by the wave-worn shore, In water woven. She moves now where the wave glistens, Her mouth mocking with laughter, In the slosh unheard When the sea slurs after; In the sleepy suckle That laps at her heel where the ripple hastens. And the laughing look laid over her arm, A tease and a wooing, Through that flying maze when the wave falls forward, From its faultless arch, from its tallest yearn To its total ruin. Lurker, She leaves with laughter, She fades where the combers falter, Is gone where the dream is gone Or the sleeper's murmur; Is gone as the wave withdrawing Sobs on the shore, and the stones are shaken; As the ruined wave Sucks and sobs in the rustling stones, When the tide is taken.
Drowsiness, identity drifting, some kind of white flower seen through isinglass, stupor, bliss, the moment before sleep as the foretaste of the moment before death experience of space receding, forgetfulness, fate a self held mesh in time like dust in a net through which breath sifts with the same kind of wet thin cloth to skin feeling as gauze or muslin
Because altruists are the least sexy people on earth, unable to say &ldquo;I want&rdquo; without embarrassment, we need to take from them everything they give, then ask for more, this is how to excite them, and because it's exciting to see them the least bit excited once again we'll be doing something for ourselves, who have no problem taking pleasure, always desirous and so pleased to be pleased, we who above all can be trusted to keep the balance.
probably the most important person I met in Vancouver  and most important conversation and event so many miles up over the Pacific Ocean looking down on whether those were coots or sea gulls in the evening water Coolidges present too and Rosemary Margaret did not walk out (why not?) and Diana Hadley gave me her pink sweater as I also was wearing Drummond Hadley's trench coat (?) (and who read that night was it Duncan?) that marge of the few feet make the difference between the West, and the Future Robin Blaser, and Duncan and that dream at the same time as I was writing about the distance between Sacramento and the old old West Robin Blaser and Mountain Meadow Massacre one lone Indian fishing in the river at the bottom of the Barranca del cobre
Here you I love In the dark plnes the wind disengages itself Days pass pursulng equal days The snow takes off in patterns that dance A silver gull drops from the west Sometimes a sail High high stars On the black cross-tree of a ship Alone Sometimes at daybreak and even my soul is moist Sounds resouds the far off sea This is a port Here you I love Here you I love and in vain the hortzon hides you You I am loving still among these chilled things Sometimes my kisses go on those weighty ships that cross the sea to make no port I see me forgotten like those old anchors Most sad are the quays when evening docks there It tires I love what I have not My ennui struggles with the slow halflights But night comes The moon makes its dream wheelworks turn Me the biggest stars watch with your eyes And if I love you pines in the wind want to sing your name with their wiry leaves
 The leaves usher in this:  the unromantic yes  of the unpersuaded girl by the blue, smoky wall at the start of term.  Term must have begun  by now, by how the town  is pale, sniffing, cold with hurt mothers, the elderly and me here.  This is the year's click.  The 0.0 of the clock.  Now for the hope and date again and the foggy walk, the light in windows!   As if I had met myself,  swallowed and set off  in two directions: down, chuckling as I deepen on towards Christmas,  and up, expecting yes,  experience getting less,  with something still to ask of somebody at a desk in the high summer.
When I clap my hands even this quietly, in gloves, in snow, the geese rise up in darkly broken circles on the winter sky. Another perfect form. In the snow before me the symmetrical pattern their wings made, rising furiously. Far off, their quiet funnel of sound settling on the frozen lake. There is a place for everything, I think, even I, wild and confused in the fallen snow. When I look back to the house the urge to break the geese again comes upon me. In the late afternoon light one lamp burns through the bubbled glass of an upstairs window like a captured sun. My husband is inside, reading. He wets his thumb methodically. He turns the pages, one by one.
when from a sidewalk out of(blown never quite to -gether by large sorry)creatures out of(clumsily shining out of)instru- ments,waltzing;undigestibly: groans.bounce !o-ras-ourh an-dorg-an ble-at-ssw-ee-t-noth ings orarancidhurd ygurdygur glingth umpssomet hings(whi,le sp,arrow,s wince among those skeletons of these trees) when sunbeams loot furnished rooms through whose foul windows absurd clouds cruise nobly ridiculous skies (the;mselve;s a;nd scr;a;tch-ing lousy full.of.rain beggars yaw:nstretchy:awn) then, o my love ,then it's Spring immortal Always &amp; lewd shy New and upon the beyond imagining spasm rise we you-with-me around(me)you IYou
but if i should say goodmorning trouble adds up all sorts of quickly things on the slate of that nigger's face(but If i should say thankyouverymuch mr rosenbloom picks strawberries with beringed hands)but if i Should say solong my tailor chuckles like a woman in a dream(but if i should say Now the all saucers but cups if begin to spoons dance every- should where say over the damned table and we hold lips Eyes everything hands you know what happens)but if i should, Say,
My cat, Pierrot The eloquence Of his sleep! Tucked under The ample breast His paws Are two velvet pillows His thick-furred boots Stretch out In luscious abandon, His colors are blue-gray And silvery white. His purrs lightly Embroider the air. No emerald, No mink muff, No ermine vest Could provide The luxury Of this cat's sleep. How rich I am!
Before thy shrine I kneel, an unknown worshipper,  Chanting strange hymns to thee and sorrowful   litanies, Incense of dirges, prayers that are as holy myrrh. Ah! goddess, on thy throne of tears and faint low   sighs,  Weary at last to theeward come the feet that err, And empty hearts grown tired of the world's vanities. How fair this cool deep silence to a wanderer  Deaf with the roar of winds along the open skies! Sweet, after sting and bitter kiss of sea-water, The pale Lethean wine within thy chalices! ...   To heed the horror of the shrine, the distant cries, And evil whispers in the gloom, or the swift whirr  Of terrible wings I, least of all thy votaries, With a faint hope to see the scented darkness stir, And, parting, frame within its quiet mysteries  One face, with lips than autumn-lilies tenderer, And voice more sweet than the far plaint of viols is,  Or the soft moan of any grey-eyed lute-player.
I met the Muse of Censorship And she had packed her bags And all the folk of Moscow Were hanging out the flags. I asked her what her prospects were And whither her thoughts did range. She said: &lsquo;I am off to Dublin town On a cultural exchange. &lsquo;And folk there be in Cambridge Who like the way I think And there be folk in Nottingham Whom I shall drown in ink &lsquo;And when we reach America The majorettes will sing: Here comes the Muse of Censorship  This is a very good thing.&rsquo; I went to the Finland Station To wave the Muse goodbye And on another platform A crowd I did espy. I saw the Muse of Freedom Alighting from the train. Far from that crowd I wept aloud For to see that Muse again.
The moon is my second face, her long cycle Still locked away. I feel rain Like a tried-on dress, I clutch it Like a book to my body. His head is there when I work, It signs my letters with a question-mark; His hands reach for me like rationed air. Day by day I let him go Till I become a woman, or even less, An incompletely furnished house That came from a different century Where I am a guest at my own childhood. I have grown inside words Into a state of unbornness, An open rose on all sides Has spoken as far as it can.
<> About the place where there is now no place But a walled hole where fruitless vines embrace Their parent skeletons that yet survive In evil thorns none of us could arrive At a more cogent answer to their ways Than one old Isaac in his latter days Had humor or compassion to contrive. I mentioned them, and Isaac shook his head: &ldquo;The Power that you call yours and I call mine Extinguished in the last of them a line That Satan would have disinherited. When we are done with all but the Divine, We die.&rdquo; And there was no more to be said.
Green is the color of everything that isnt brown, the tones ranging like mountains, the colors changing. You look up toward the hills &amp; fog  the familiarity of it after so many years a resident tourist. A young man walks toward you in vague streetcrossing denims &amp; pronounced boots. From the pallor of his gait, the orange splotch twin gobs of sunset in his shades, from the way he vibrates his surrounding air, you can tell, you can tell he's friendly, circulating, he's a Californian: comes to visit, stays for years, marries, moves a wife in, kids, wears out TV sets, gets stranded on loneliness, afternoon pharmaceutica, so that the sky's got moon in it by 3 o'clock, is blooo, is blown  The girls: theyre all winners reared by grandmothers &amp; CBS. Luckier ones get in a few dances with mom, a few hours, before dad goes back in the slam, before &ldquo;G'bye I'm off to be a singer!&rdquo; &amp; another runaway Miss American future drifts over the mountain &amp; into the clouds. Still there's a beautifulness about California. It's based on the way each eyeblink toward the palms &amp; into the orange grove leads backstage into the onionfields. Unreachable, winter happens inside you. Your unshaded eyes dilate at the spectacle. You take trips to contain the mystery.
From a luminous shore into an ocean of darkness  leaped a star  like a madman. They stared at him, the innumerable stars,   astonished that the speck of light, their erstwhile neighbour, could  vanish in an instant.   He's gone  to the bottom of that ocean  where lie the corpses of  hundreds of dead stars,  whom anguish of mind has driven to suicide  and the eternal extinction of light.  O why? What was the matter with him?  Not once did anyone ask  why he abandoned his life!   But I know what he would have said in reply  had anyone posed the question.   I know what burned him  as long as he was alive.  It was the torment of laughter,   nothing else! A burning lump of coal, to hide its dark heart,  maintains a continuous laughter.  The more it laughs, the more it burns. So, even so did laughter's   fierce fire burn, burn him without end. That's why today he's run off in sheer despair from a brilliant solitude full of stars to the starless solitude of darkness.  Why, stars, why do you mock him and laugh like that?  You've not been harmed. You shine as you did before.  He'd never meant  (he wasn't that arrogant) to darken you by quenching himself. Drowned! A star has drowned  in the ocean of darkness   in the deep midnight  in the abysmal sky. Heart, my heart, do you wish to sleep beside that dead star  in that ocean of darkness  in this deep midnight  in that abysmal sky?
<> They go so far And no farther, and you may hunger For any star You want to, or any distant Beckoning hill, But the roads will keep your feet in them Sober and still. These roads are not the kind that Set a man wild With wishing he'd been born a Journey-man's child. Whether they lead to the pasture Or cross-road store, They always come carefully home to Your own back door.
Time is Berkeley the place is now where some unenlightened children beyond the rim of my attention are actively lollygagging on the hard sidewalk laid in where trees once loved so informally, or dribbling Ishmael Reed's zen basketballs across the playground in windy spring light. I make nothing of this until the din subsides &amp; I'm forced to account for the silence. Orange juice a roll some lettuce banana/milk the way we eat now, appearances real enough dissolving in the juices of my hidden stomach. Form  Objects clutter my vision: books beads fern shoes machine-parts a table a decoration squash a chance scattering of oolong leaf the 29&cent; teacup &amp; pencils apple seed a fragrant picture of you pinned against the wall to mountains a TV set that's never worked some clocks, a moment, our plastic cubbyhole in Ha Ha Street. Everything is supposed to have changed yet flatulence &amp; decline are still being discussed with the same open passion in all but the right places; I manage to stay as poor as ever, a part-Indian excavator of old inner cities out here at the edge of the jungle, but one day I'm going to move even further from the so-called center on into the heart of things. Years may pass again or only some hours before I dance out the shape of another clear day, eternal unit of forever
Rebelliously leaning his rifle against the taut wires of the fence he stepped over, pivoting on his leading foot watching as the barrel began its slow arc towards him; the hair trigger jarring as the bead of the sights clipped a barbed twist, the crack of firing annihilating the quail-heavy fields.
The noiseless marching of the stars Sweeps above me all night long; Up the skies, over the skies, Passes the uncounted throng, Without haste, without rest, From the east to the west: Vega, Deneb, white Altair Shine like crystals in the air, And the lonely Fomalhaut In the dark south, paces low. Now the timid Pleiades Leave the shelter of the trees, While toward the north, mounting high, Gold Capella, like a queen, Watches over her demesne Stretching toward the kingly one, Dusky, dark Aldebaran. Betelguese and Rigel burn In their wide wheel, slow to turn, And in the sharp November frost Bright Sirius, with his blue light Completes the loveliness of night.
As one, who, journeying westward with the sun,  Beholds at length from the up-towering hills,  Far-off, a land unspeakable beauty fills, Circe&auml;n peaks and vales of Avalon: And, sinking weary, watches, one by one,  The big seas beat between; and knows it skills  No more to try; that now, as Heaven wills, This is the helpless end, that all is done: So 't is with him, whom long a vision led  In quest of Beauty and who finds at last,  She lies beyond his effort; all the waves Of all the world between them: while the dead,  The myriad dead, who populate the Past  With failure, hail him from forgotten graves.
On the shore of the Caspian Sea I sobbed to be so far away, and across the plains of Turkestan, passing camel caravans, I wept, and in the high Pamirs, and among the ruins of Balkh, Mother of Cities. Desolation filled me as I saw everywhere the men out walking, holding hands or with arms around each other, friends kissing on streetcorners. Why wasn't I happy? I had to come to where men were as I was, or rather where what I was was one of the possibilities of a man. This was the world of my ancestors  I knew it in my bones  ancestors whose language was lost, and my bones were announcing that I had suffered for nothing, been punished for nothing. Not only my parents had been crazy but where I grew up was crazy  no one could tell me different now, I thought, as I picked up a blue tile from the ruins and tucked it in my pocket, rich with new-found treasures. But no matter that I knew  and the further I went the more I knew  I sobbed and sobbed, for what had been done could not, in this lifetime at least, be undone.
He likes to walk around barefoot while I mind his boots the only part of him which can stand still. Pieces of broken glass and stones don't seem to cut; his soles are tough, dark like leather, skin socks. Here is the trail of flat-crushed daisies his going left behind, small white and yellow crumbs in grass. He is unreachable, framed in an accidental afternoon that lingers, hungry for souvenirs. These boots which he leaves in my care will belong to me longer than he will belong to any earth, any air.
You can't sleep here, My good man, You can't sleep here. This is the house of God. The usher opens the church door and he goes out. You can't sleep in this car, old top, Not here. If Jones found you He'd give you to the cops. Get-the-hell out now, This ain't home. You can't stay here. The chauffeur opens the door and he gets out. Lord! You can't let a man lie In the streets like this. Find an officer quick. Send for an ambulance. Maybe he is sick but He can't die on this corner, Not here! He can't die here. Death opens a door. Oh, God, Lemme git by St. Peter. Lemme sit down on the steps of your throne. Lemme rest somewhere. What did yuh say, God? What did yuh say? You can't sleep here.... Bums can't stay.... The man's raving. Get him to the hospital quick. He's attracting a crowd. He can't die on this corner. No, no, not here.
My muscles unravel like spools of ribbon: there is not a shadow of pain. I will pose like this for the rest of the afternoon, for the remainder of all noons. The rain is making a valley of my dim features. I am in Albania, I am on the Rhine. It is autumn, I smell the rain, I see children running through columbine. I am honey, I am several winds. My nerves dissolve, my limbs wither  I don't love you. I don't love you.
(im)c-a-t(mo) b,i;l:e FallleA ps!fl OattumblI sh?dr IftwhirlF (Ul)(lY) &amp;&amp;&amp; away wanders:exact ly;as if not hing had,ever happ ene D
He knows that Christmas is somewhere round a corner. We have put out his cards, read them to him, Hung the odd picture with a twist of tinsel. It is time for one of his favourite quotations: &lsquo;The feast of reason, and the flow of soul&rsquo;, When the world perches on chairs, hands Chinese figs, Sips the liqueurs he offers us by proxy. It is Boxing Day, late afternoon. We bring the crib. Virgin and Child suffer their nativity, Doubled in his dressing-table mirror. He has put an occasion together in his head, And, at some far, unguessable cost, watches A candle in a lantern, swinging softly. &lsquo;The Holly and the Ivy, when they are both full-grown ...&rsquo; And, please, he would like Dorothy's favourite carol: &lsquo;He came all so still where his mother was ...&rsquo; We eat, drink, and are merry. For company, He nibbles air in front of a petit-four, Asks and answers a little of the  For an hour, he is the Master of all Ceremonies, Asking formal advice for &lsquo;friends who live next door&rsquo;  My sister's family would we please suggest A Place of Significance where they could spend The three-weeks holiday he would like to give them. There is a quotation. Something to do with &lsquo;Breathes there a man ...&rsquo; and &lsquo;plains of Marathon&rsquo;  I cannot see things clearly enough to find it, And he would like each member of the company To suggest a print, an etching he could buy, Supposing he had that princely sum, a hundred pounds to spend. It is not easy to put names to all the faces. He is very tired now. He has managed it quite beautifully. When the door shuts on voices, love and manners, &lsquo;Well&rsquo;, I say, &lsquo;you had your Christmas.&rsquo; &lsquo;It was lovely.&rsquo; At three in the morning he calls for me, His candle bright in its darkening lantern. &lsquo;Is it Christmas? Happy Christmas.&rsquo; &lsquo;Happy Christmas.&rsquo;
<> And autumn goes and spring comes back; But all the fruit that dead trees bear Is hopeless, bitter, black. The living trees grow lustily, The ocean running through their veins; The dead trees squat in smoke and dust And never lift their heads in rains. The living trees have one blue roof Enough for all on hill and cloud; The dead trees have no room in life, And so, black roof on roof, they crowd. The living trees have silver stars To rustle down their leafy streams; The only stars the dead trees have Are starved and stunted dreams!
The delicate french girl jukebox husky lament softens the air over checkered tablecloths I haven't been in Kettle of Fish a year Between my Moscows and Wichitas a lonesome moment Content to gaze at Bodenheim &amp; Gould in garish oil, Phantoms I'm not over the bar wall mirroring photos of old habitu&eacute;s renowned characteristic seasons for lack of immortality, a bunch of provincial drunks fucked up D. T. unbearables or Mafia brothers-in-law. Old charm of anonymity, phonograph memory playing familiar bar tunes infrequentvisited much once real hotspot cops on telephone me drunk loved some heart friend image money at same table same prophecy felt immortal then now come true sit decade hence jukebox-dazed an Angel remembered to forget.
My parrot is emerald green, His tail feathers, marine. He bears an orange half-moon Over his ivory beak. He must be believed to be seen, This bird from a Rousseau wood. When the urge is on him to speak, He becomes too true to be good. He uses his beak like a hook To lift himself up with or break Open a sunflower seed, And his eye, in a bold white ring, Has a lapidary look. What a most astonishing bird, Whose voice when he chooses to sing Must be believed to be heard. That stuttered staccato scream Must be believed not to seem The shriek of a witch in the room. But he murmurs some muffled words (Like someone who talks through a dream) When he sits in the window and sees The to-and-fro wings of wild birds In the leafless improbable trees.
Gold beard combd down like chinese firegold hair braided at skull- nape  gold turning silver soon worn face young forehead wrinkled, deep-boned smile, tiny azure earring, turquoise finger stone, Paramita beads centered by ivory skull-nut  On Deer Mountain, in ship's iron belly, sat crosslegged on Princeton couch, body voice rumbling Bear Sutra to younger selves her long hair to rug, dungareed legs lotus-postured; or that half-Indian boy his face so serious woe'd by tree suffering he's more compassionate to bear, skunk, deer, coyote, hemlock, whale than to his own new-sprung cock. O Lizard Dharma what doth breath, that Aums thru elm bough &amp; rock canyon loud as thru mammal skull hummed, hymn to bone-chaliced minds now multiplied over planet colleges so many, with such hollow cheek gaze-eye tenderness, Fitzgerald himself'd weep to see student faces celestial, longhaired angelic Beings planet-doomed to look thru too many human eyes ? Princeton in Eternity! Long years fall, December's woods in snow Old poets half century ago their bones cracked up in death alcohol trembling in immortal eyes, Fitzgerald &amp; Kerouac weeping, on earth once  earth's voice moves time, old vows and prophecies remembered, mountain prayers repeated, Gary's voice echoes hollow under round electric lamps.
A story about Indians, the tribe that claimed Mt. Shasta... Five lawyers said, &ldquo;It's ridiculous! What possible use can they have for the mountain?&rdquo; The interpreter said, &ldquo;Your Honor, they say that their gods live there.&rdquo; How different this is from the Buzzy Schofields, people I met in Pasadena. Green lawns, imposing villas  actually, these are caves inhabited by Pufendorf's dwarfs and Vico's Big Feet, the &ldquo;abandoned by God.&rdquo; Thought, says Vico, begins in caves  but not the Buzzy Schofields'. They're haunted by Red China  bugles a sky lit with artillery. They're terrified they'll be brainwashed. They can see themselves breaking under torture... &ldquo;Stop! I'm on your side! You're making a terrible mistake!&rdquo; O even in Paradise the mind would make its own winter.
&ldquo;  Than Time's recorded heroes who have bled  And burned and lived and died for Truth,&rdquo; he said,  &ldquo;May still, in proof of all our lives profess, Join with their great companionship, to press  In ways where none who are not free may tread,   We must endure to die! and, being dead,  To live in death's transcendent loneliness!&rdquo; And thus thereafter we beheld him live,  Rapt in the faith of those who most believe,  Who most are curious and unsatisfied; Till, to the summits and the silences,  Where all the Mighty stand with Socrates,  We saw him rise transfigured as he died!
Last night you told me, where we, parting, waited,  Of love somehow I'd known before you told.  Long, long ago, perhaps, this love was fated,  For why was it made suddenly so old? Is it because the love we have and cherish  Born with us seems, and as ourselves shall last? Part of our lives, we can not let it perish  Out of our present's future or its past? Yet, all was changed; and, still, I did not wonder  That, robed in vaster splendor, broke the dawn: Nor marvel that, beside my feet and under,  Each flower seemed fairer than the flower gone. The wild bird's silvery warble seemed completer;  A whiter magic filled the morn and noon, And night each night! seemed holier grown and sweeter  With Babylonian witchcraft of the moon.  Is love an emanation? whose ideal  Communicates its beauty? Is it moved Through some strange means to consecrate the real?  Making the world the worthier to be loved?
How white how calm the hours are I still have time the body of living beats in my hand schemeless like a garden of voices in the sky what crucifiedmounts a creatured stair soldiersgentlemen soldiers' boots have made it crimson there soldiers flay the earth with musicwoman shriek I said and cry I said and sayhis name is not the rush of flesh to hold when soldiers place the long far distance over the flight and song of him ponderous eyes move in the silent face his mouth is strained with stretching crazy roots we like the sound I said the sight I said of boots of boots I said I still have time
The free minds Tell us freely about their freedom. I myself prefer To face the fact of my unfreedom, And to speak from that. I have signed round robins. Protests against Caesar, Protests against Brutus, Protests against Octavius. I can say I have protested. And will continue. Habit dies hard. But I know the truth of my unfreedom, And know that I myself am not An overwhelming argument for free survival. But I do know those who are, A few who are, Without reproach or reservation. Which gives my speech a sentimental tinge  Sans principle, in open country, All my shelter is this drooping shield.
This was our testing year after the first When we were drunk on love and drunk on light. Unquenchable our hunger and our thirst For shining presence through the longest night. Somehow we wrote each other every day, Mingled disparate lives in rich exchange. All must be now. What if it did not stay? All must be tightly held for fear of change. But such fierce ardor soon wore itself out. The phone became a monstrous instrument, And words tangled themselves into a knot. Something got frayed of all we felt and meant. It was the year of testing. Now we know Exactly what was asked: we had to grow.
 An oldish man from India's north,   skinny and tall. White moustache, shaved chin,    face like a shrivelled fruit. Chintz shirt. Dhoti in wrestler-style.  Umbrella on left shoulder. Short stick in right hand. Shoes with turned up toes. He's walking to town.   Bhadra morning. Sun muted by thin clouds. After a muffled, stifling night   a fog-damp breeze vacillates through young amloki twigs.    The wayfarer appeared  on the outermost line of my universe, where insubstantial shadow-pictures move.    I just knew him to be a person.  He had no name, no identity, no pain,    no need whatsoever of anything.     On the road to market    on a Bhadra morning     he was just a person.    He saw me too on the last limits of his world's waste land,     where, within a blue fog, connections between men there were none,     where I was just a person.  At home he has a calf, a myna in a cage,  a wife, who grinds wheat between stones, fat brass bangles on her wrists. He has his neighbours, a washerman, a grocer with his shop. He has his debts, to merchants from Kabul. But nowhere in that world of his is there me a person.
The mountain absent, a remote folk-memory. The peninsula vanished, hill, trees  gone, shoreline a rumour. And we equate God with these absences  Deus absconditus. But God is imaged as well or better in the white stillness resting everywhere, giving to all things an hour of Sabbath, no leaf stirring, the hidden places tranquil in solitude.
Here lies a childhood lost, Quickened into a ghost. Six winters brought their snows: Fate spun the bobbin loose. Stranger, you who inherit My small protectorate, Bring, to confirm your reign Gifts to her marker-stone. Honour your Household Gods, Respect the much-loved dead. Be happy. No dark years, No further stones. No tears To stain your patch of sun. Think of Erotion.
Lately I've begun to notice their hands as they angle to their seats, just in time to beat the daily bell. I watch them cramp each finger around a pencil, the index nudging a swollen steeple, their pale moons rising up over the raw, ragged flesh. In spite of my vigilance I never catch their fingers seeking their mouths, not even a nibble. They are busy with crayons that spatter like rainbows, they twirl wooden rulers like prayer beads, pick apart the sniveling edge of a dress for hours while their wooden eyes go on watching mine for some glimmer of warning. Oh I've taught them history: the brave dead after bombings, never still, strewn in courtyards, curled over the bare portals of churches where one bell tolls the first hour. Here the wind grows nervous, taps the sparse branches and the trees are, sometimes, like lashes slicing the wild white eye of the risen moon. I tell no one, but there is evidence: their lives gauged early in their little hands they will not raise to answer for the midnight rendezvous when they schemed fists jammed up into their mouths, eyes sealed shut  the murders of brothers, or suicide, some martyrdom reckoned to calm for once the wild ringing of our hearts.
The window was made of ice with bears lumbering across it,  Bears the size of flies; The ceiling was one great web with flies cantankering in it,  Flies the size of men; The floor was riddled with holes with men phutscuttering down them  Into the jaws of mice. Outside there were no other houses, only bedizened hoardings  With panties prancing on them And an endless file of chromium-plated lamp posts  With corpses dangling from them And one gaunt ruined church with a burglar alarm filibustering  High and dry in the steeple. Here then the young man came who wanted to eat and drink,  To play, pray, make love; Electronic voices nagged at him out of the filtered air,  The eyes on the hoarding winked; He knocked at the door of the house, the bears buzzed and the flies  Howled to him to come in. Inside he found a table laid for two, a mirror  Flanking the double bed, On the night table a scent spray, a tin of biscuits, a bible,  A crucifix on the wall And beside it a comic postcard: all this he carefully noticed  And then he noticed the floor Bomb-pocked with tiny holes, from one of which there rose  One tiny wisp of white. He watched as it clawed the air two inches from the floor  And saw it for what it was, The arm of a girl, he watched and just could hear her voice  Say: Wait! Wait till I grow. And the arm grew and he wished to bend and clutch the hand  But found he could no more move, The arm grew and the fingers groped for help, the voice  That had grown with the arm, the voice That was now a woman's about to be saved or lost was calling  For help. He could not move. Then everything buzzed and boomed. The chaps outside on the lamp   posts  Hooted, broke wind, and wept, Men the size of flies dropped down his neck while the mansized  Flies gave just three cheers And he could not move. The darkness under the floor gave just  One shriek. The arm was gone.
There was a time for discoveries  For the headlands looming above in the First light and the surf and the Crying of gulls: for the curve of the Coast north into secrecy. That time is past. The last lands have been peopled. The oceans are known now. Se&ntilde;ora: once the maps have all been made A man were better dead than find new continents. A man would better never have been born Than find upon the open ocean flowers Drifted from islands where there are no islands, Or midnight, out of sight of any land, Smell on the altering air the odor of rosemary. No fortune passes that misfortune  To lift along the evening of the sky, Certain as sun and sea, a new-found land Steep from an ocean where no landfall can be.
In the evening after work when I go down the little side street in Battersea, to the tiny shop with its packets of Lyons' tea with blue labels in the window  and with them a pink tin or two of salmon; and the black and brown boot laces hang from the gas bracket with its two pale globes, a little bell jangles and the Japanese wind bells tinkle furiously for a minute and my feet strike loudly on the boards. After a while a little old woman with grey hair comes out and sells me matches. On the counter is a glass case with collar studs and tins of blacking. Wood bundles are stacked against the counter and I smell the tarred string binding them. In the air is paraffin and the strong acid of pickles. Pickles! Red, yellow  onions, walnuts, gherkins! their acid smell is poignant vertiginous ... Yellow or red  mustard pickles or the sickening magenta of red cabbage. I cannot resist them, they bite into me, I too, once lost a love  and so I take the horrible magenta of the red cabbage in a piece of newspaper  and the old lady carefully drains off the vitriol. And the shop grows sombre and after a while the little old woman goes out of the shop to her bright parlour, where perhaps she has a parrot. Such a hollow jangling of the bell when I go out and the wind bells tinkle, tinkle ...
Those who were far inland Saw, for a moment, the approaching tempest, A sudden animal raging across the woods, Bend each tree as a current sways weeds in water. The roaring beast turned the landscape to a storm track Till it hit the house, cracked the double windows And blew the barn door to leave empty hinges. And this after it had been broken On the cliffs and high hills that intervened to the shore This far inland in a valley soliloquy Where in stifling summers the stream forgets its escape And almost ceases to talk of a fabled sea. It was only when the surprising night had gone, Like flotsam hurled with an eddy to lodge in a cleft Among dry rocks news of the broken coast Flooded inland. The air where birds unconcerned were drifting again Was alive with hourly messages from the sea; Roads linked the land in help to the disaster, Rivers, swollen miles up, led again to the sea. Yesterday and tomorrow dissolve at such times. The delicate structure of sequence is drowned with the land. These days are in no season, they recall frames In an uncle's sepia hall him in a punt Poling the main street past submerged shop fronts  But no lives lost there: recall more The fireman's helmet in a mothballed cupboard, Recall Southampton burning. But we inland, watching the buds grow out Can think but never know what corn land will be like Where no green shoot will spring for five more years; And we inland, intent on our sprouting hedges Can think but never hear what sea pastures are like With the walls down like pebbles and the tides flowing over the land. With a fir tree for symbol still to watch in the wind We have time to collect statistics and erect some comfort From appeals and tin boxes passed from hand to hand: But they have only the sea and the tides returning. Storing a view before the failure of sunlight We blow on our fingers, and know an East wind coming Which will snatch the rags of a tramp to reveal a shadow In our minds, of a king, and there he'll nobly suffer. Only so, inland or flying over the channel Hearing the wind or watching the distant water We glimpse, for a moment, the fullness of the tide.
Meet thou the event And terrible happening of Thine end: for thou art come Upon the remote, cold place Of ultimate dissolution and With dumb, wide look Thou, impotent, dost feel Impotence creeping on Thy potent soul. Yea, now, caught in The aghast and voiceless pain Of death, thyself doth watch Thyself becoming naught. Peace.. Peace.. for at The last is comfort. Lo, now Thou hast no pain. Lo, now The waited presence is Within the room; the voice Speaks final-gentle: &ldquo;Child, Even thy careful nurse, I lift thee in my arms For greater ease and while Thy heart still beats, place my Cool fingers of oblivion on Thine eyes and close them for Eternity. Thou shalt Pass sleeping, nor know When sleeping ceases. Yet still A little while thy breathing lasts, Gradual is faint and fainter; I Must listen close the end.&rdquo; Rest. And you others.. All. Grave-fellows in Green place. Here grows Memorial every spring's Fresh grass and here Your marking monument Was built for you long, long Ago when Caius Cestius died.
She came to him in dreams her ears Diddering like antennae, and her eyes Wide as dark flowers where the dew Holds and dissolves a purple hoard of shadow. The thunder clouds crouched back, and the world opened Tiny and bright as a celandine after rain. A gentle light was on her, so that he Who saw the talons in the vetch Remembered now how buttercup and daisy Would bounce like springs when a child's foot stepped off  them. Oh, but never dared he touch  Her fur was still electric to the fingers. Yet of all the beasts blazoned in gilt and blood In the black-bound missal of his mind, Pentecostal dove and paschal lamb, Eagle, lion, serpent, she alone Lived also in the noon of ducks and sparrows; And the cleft-mouthed kiss which plugged the night with fever Was sweetened by a lunch of docks and lettuce.
When you said it wasn't my fault but something in you that you couldn't explain I knew you were already a memory I had of a girl who stood at the window looking out on the lost freedom of distance. All that's left is a white blouse in the closet, like a schoolgirl who can't explain why she wants to be left alone, or like a younger sister hiding from the predestined failure of grown-ups. I wish I could comfort her with flowers or a future full of the sweets she thinks we've cruelly withheld, but it's you she needs, you, to explain what it's like to be absent, to be a memory that can't explain.
A tally of forces, consequent memories, of times and places  habits of preparation at other points of time and place. And the hand found the fingers still on it, moved the thumb, easily, to the forefinger, still worked. What has come. Age? But, to know itself, needs occasion, as, no longer young wants a measure. The mirror the mind is, reflective, in that guise, long habit of much delaying thought to savor terms of the impression  it's not as bad as one thought, but that is relative. Not as simple as the boat is leaking, he, she, it, they or we, you and I, are sinking. Within the world, this one, many quirks accomplished, effected, in the thought, I don't know how, I only live here, with the body I walk in. Hence I love you, I did, do, a moment ago it was daylight, now dark l wonder what the memory means, loving you more than I had thought to. No agreement to stay, see it out, the dereliction of fleshy duties  but not burn down the house for whatever rage was once.
<> Were outraged here. In one brief sullen thrust The bullet tapped the skull, and so prepared it For occupancy of dust: And that was long ago, before this season Wrote its precarious legend on the leaf. Here flesh was forfeit. Simply, with adequate reason, Waiving consent or grief, The mind forsook its trim elaborate tower, Its windowed room, so artfully contrived. All beauty it controlled before that hour The stinging lead was hived  The vision, all the intricate ways of seeing, The pallid flesh bemused by its own doom  Gave over then. But the bullet remains, there being At length, sufficient room.
I fight and fight. I wake up. The oasis is now dark. I cannot hear anything. The wind is felt and the stars and the sand so that no one will be taken by pain. I sit next to the bushes, Hercules couldn't move me, and sleep and dream. The sand, the stars are solid in this sleeping oasis, alone with the desert and the metaphysical cigarette.
Low-shot light of a sharp December  Shifting, lifted a morning haze: Opening fans of smooth sea-water  Touched in silence the tiny bays: In bright Beaumaris the people waited   This was Laurelie's day of days. At the northern end of the street a vista  Of sunlit woodland; and south, a tower; Across the water from Hansom's terrace,  The glass'd reflection of Penmaenmawr: High on her balcony Laurelie Williams  Waved the shovel and shot the shower. Down on us all fell heated ha'pence,  Up to her all of us looked for more: Laurelie Williams, Laurelie Williams   Lovelier now than ever before With your straight black hair and your fresh complexion:  Diamond-bright was the brooch you wore. Life be kind to you, Laurelie Williams,  With girlhood over and marriage begun: Queuing for buses and rearing children,  Washing the dishes and missing the fun, May you still recall how you flung the coppers  On bright Beaumaris in winter sun.
Oh, in the world of the flesh of man iron gives the deadly wound and the wheel starts the principle of all evil. Oh, in the world of things the wheel is the first principle of evil. But in the world of the soul of man there, and there alone lies the pivot of pure evil only in the soul of man, when it pivots upon the ego. When the mind makes a wheel which turns on the hub of the ego and the will, the living dynamo, gives the motion and the speed and the wheel of the conscious self spins on in absolution, absolute absolute, absolved from the sun and the earth and the moon, absolute consciousness, absolved from strife and kisses absolute self-awareness, absolved from the meddling of creation absolute freedom, absolved from the great necessities of being then we see evil, pure evil and we see it only in man and in his machines.
Seems lak to me de stars don't shine so bright, Seems lak to me de sun done loss his light, Seems lak to me der's nothin' goin' right, Sence you went away. Seems lak to me de sky ain't half so blue, Seems lak to me dat ev'ything wants you, Seems lak to me I don't know what to do, Sence you went away. Seems lak to me dat ev'ything is wrong, Seems lak to me de day's jes twice es long, Seems lak to me de bird's forgot his song, Sence you went away. Seems lak to me I jes can't he'p but sigh, Seems lak to me ma th'oat keeps gittin' dry, Seems lak to me a tear stays in ma eye, Sence you went away.
Tangled lines, tender regions, hard thoughts, Pain, Frictions, be my oyster's sandy Grain. Come to that deflowered cauliflower,  My brain. Fish-bone it down the mind's throat, gnat  My eye. Sit stubborn between boot and ball,  And lie Unkneaded at night until I wonder, Well, why? Coughed bone, pulled boor, speared gnat,  Are fuel, Can burn over the mind. Brings to us  The cruel Grain under the sole of a fish body   A jewel!
I know if I type in the night Putting the snow where it belongs There in the winds by the pine forests They will turn from their bear hugs In the bed downstairs, That mountainous woman will tilt her head toward the wall And send her hate on midnight dumb-waiters upwards; Her eyes are goosing the interstices Of my toes even now And for no greater crime than padding quietly and writing in a soft-point blue And with a great respect for love, Even the love of stallions And of men who break one rib at a time.
Go, swallow, and tell, now that the summer is dying, Spirits who loved him in time, where in the earth he is laid. Dumb secrets are here, hard as the elm-roots in winter; We who are left here confront words of inscrutable calm. Life cuts into stone this that on earth is remembered, How for the needs of the dead loving provision was made. Strong words remain true, under the hammer of Babel: Sleeps in the heart of the rock all that a god would restore. Never shall time be stilled in the quarry of Cwmrhydyceirw, Not while the boulder recoils under the force of the fuse. Tablets imprisoned by rock, inert in the sleeping arena, Quake in the shudder of air, knowing the swallow has passed. One grief is enough, one tongue, to transfigure the ages: Let our tears for the dead earn the forgiveness of dust.
Wise men in long white togas come forward during the festivities, rendering account of their labours, and King Belos listens. O, mighty King, says the first, I've made a pair of wings for your throne. You shall rule from the air.  Then applause and cheering follow, the man is richly rewarded. O&rsquo; mighty King, says the second, I've made a self-acting dragon which will automatically defeat your foes.  Then applause and cheering follow, the man is richly rewarded. O, mighty King, says the third, I've made a destroyer of bad dreams. Now nothing shall disturb your royal sleep.  Then applause and cheering follow, the man is richly rewarded. But the fourth man only says: Constant failure has dogged my steps this year. Nothing went right. I bungled everything I touched. Horrified silence follows and the wise King Belos is silent too. It was ascertained later that the fourth man was Archimedes.
Roving the beach I chance on them, Broad daylight, half-naked bodies coupled in rut, the man Lunging from below, the woman Straddled on top (no sand In the cunt), the expliit apparatus Flagrantly exposed, climax a knotted Convulsion. Seeing me, They stare with dazed faces, like animals surprised, Impassively regarding [me] until I pass by, Then resume their rut. And climbing the bluff I look down the long shore, seeing the white line of foam, The churn of breakers, the froth and spume of it Seething in churn. It is the line of ecstasy, Vibration of transcendence, beaten up into / &short; Out of the primal confrontation: Water and shore, the width of the ocean And the rockwall of the continent. It is the ecstasy line indeed when the grunion run. But there is another such line, another tide and another synthesis. For from behind the hills come the hordes of sun-seekers, Pouring out of the cities across the mountains, all the bay-side peninsula, And from the vast valley beyond. On weekends their cars Thread through the passes, long serpentine lines of them, And fair out along the [?]. Here they strip off their clothes And run down to the sea, meet the ecstasy of the wave With the ecstasy of the flesh, and thus, in the summer [?], Begins the line of copulation, in the nooks and crannies of the cliffs Little convulsive knottings of flesh, the sun looking down on the wave and women, on rockhead and male, With sublime [?], calling and evoking, the [?] ecstasy.
After the blast of lightning from the east,  The flourish of loud clouds, the Chariot Throne; After the drums of time have rolled and ceased,  And by the bronze west long retreat is blown, Shall Life renew these bodies? Of a truth,  All death will he annul, all tears assuage? Or fill these void veins full again with youth,  And wash, with an immortal water, age? When I do ask white Age, he saith not so:  &rsquo;My head hangs weighed with snow.&lsquo; And when I hearken to the Earth, she saith:  &rsquo;My fiery heart shrinks, aching. It is death. Mine ancient scars shall not be glorified, Nor my titanic tears, the seas, be dried.&lsquo;
You lift it cautiously on a pole And you cast it over the wall And into the neighbouring compound. (You do not wish to kill, You do not wish to be killed Or suffer in other respects.) In the neighbouring compound Short cries ensue or vexed sighs, Then they hook it carefully on a pole And heave it over the wall And into the adjacent garden. (They do not wish to kill, Or be killed or incommoded.) Then in the adjacent garden Someone will pick it up on a pole (The kind that every householder keeps Against such contingencies) And sling it warily over the wall. By the law of eternal recurrence, That serpentine cycle, One day it reaches your compound again (You have had peace in the meantime) And you lift it up on a pole  Unless you perceive it has died of bruising Or age or weakening of the will to live And be tossed repeatedly over a wall, In which case you simply ignore it Or fork it into the garden  Otherwise you pick up the snake on a pole And you cast it cautiously ...
Mexcity drugstore table, giant sexfiend in black spats Sticks knife in a plump faggot's sportscoat seam; at Teotihuac&aacute;n in blue sunlight, I slap my mocking blond nephew for getting lost on the Moon Pyramid. In Oakland, legendary police shoot a naked black boy running out of his political basement In Pentagon giant machines humm and bleep in neon arcades, Buttons click in sockets &amp; robots pencil prescriptions for acid gas sunsets  New York on the stairway, the dumbed whitefaced Junkie pulls a knife and stares immobile the victim gasps, &ldquo;oh come off it&rdquo; &amp; a sixpack of cokebottles bounces down worn black steps, in Vietnam plastic fire Streams down myriad phantom cheeks rayed over planet television  Adrenalin runs in armpits from Los Angeles to Paris, Harlem &amp; Cannes explode thru plateglass, Sunset Strip &amp; Sorbonne are crowded with Longhaired angels armed with gasmasks &amp; Acid, &amp; Angry Democrats gather in Chicago fantasizing armies running thru Sewers sprayed with Mace. I walk up Avenida Ju&aacute;rez, over cobbled shadows, blue-tiled streetlamps lighting Sanborns' arcades, behind me violent chic fairy gangsters with bloody hands hustle after midnight to cut my throat from its beard.
distrusts all pasts conditionals and perfects future continuous too suffers fallibility of memory, senses that history is compound of minute particles, questions whether event exists if unrecorded, hears noise of one small plane passing over rather high up gradually diminishing into nothing, cool, lightweight, ancient as Buddhist conception of fate in successive incarnations, then hears the big ships begin to hum
&ldquo;Are you Mr. William Stafford?&rdquo; &ldquo;Yes, but....&rdquo; Well, it was yesterday. Sunlight used to follow my hand. And that's when the strange siren-like sound flooded over the horizon and rushed through the streets of our town. That's when sunlight came from behind a rock and began to follow my hand. &ldquo;It's for the best,&rdquo; my mother said &ldquo;Nothing can ever be wrong for anyone truly good.&rdquo; So later the sun settled back and the sound faded and was gone. All along the streets every house waited, white, blue, gray; trees were still trying to arch as far as they could. You can't tell when strange things with meaning will happen. I'm [still] here writing it down just the way it was. &ldquo;You don't have to prove anything,&rdquo; my mother said. &ldquo;Just be ready for what God sends.&rdquo; I listened and put my hand out in the sun again. It was all easy. Well, it was yesterday. And the sun came, Why It came.
<> The mist is in the sunset, And dreams lie low In the silence of the foam; Beyond the dim horizon Where the creeping darkness pauses I hear the grey winds calling And they lead desire home. O Ave to the evening star And Vale to the setting sun; And a deep, deep sea across the bar Where the grey winds call and run Oh far across the hope of speech A doubt is on desire, And Love lies low In the pauses of my heart; My speech and silence hovers On the verge of phantom futures, While I watch the morrows dawning And the yesterdays depart. O Ave to the evening star And Vale to the setting sun; And a deep, deep sea across the bar 1
The illness had wanted to kill her Although it had not, quite. It had left her, however, knotted and pale, Of the size of a twelve-year-old child, An underground child, mushroom white, With pitted cheeks and the look Of the one for whom it is perhaps too late To grow up, and so who stands Somewhere off at the start Of the about to be and the never not. And always silent. But then  Speech was a thing far apart. How could she say. It had been so long She had been kept inside and away  Like a child with a pointed head Kept in bed in the slanting light In a place cut off where they store old things, Like a mad prince of the counterpanes  Except that it was not so rank, So slanting and dusty in the weak light, Though with the dog and the cat it was cramped At the back of the store (with her mother out front) In the faint greys that had stayed so long They came as close to her as a friend, Close as the sickness, and when they went Took what she had which was them, Nothing more, and left her to find her way back. You saw it there in her eyes. Something sat there like a small thing That having been taken away so far Can't hear the echoes from the near And does not know how to be With the strange untrue of the real, There being, neither, no one to say If it's that or not or to try However they might to draw her away From the tense where she lives of the still, No one to mend her, baffled and cropt.
We have loved each other in this time twenty years And with such love as few men have in them even for One or for the marriage month or the hearing of Three nights' carts in the street but it will leave them. We have been lovers the twentieth year now: Our bed has been made in many houses and evenings. The apple-tree moves at the window in this house: There were palms rattled the night through in one: In one there were red tiles and the sea's hours. We have made our bed in the changes of many months  The light of the day is still overlong in the windows Till night shall bring us the lamp and one another. Those that have seen her have no thought what she is: Her face is clear in the sun as a palmful of water: Only by night and in love are the dark winds on it.... I wrote this poem that day when I thought Since we have loved we two so long together Shall we have done together all love gone? Or how then will it change with us when the breath Is no more able for such joy and the blood is Thin in the throat and the time not come for death?
The old mail coach to Belton Seemed to sweep the purple seas: The old mail coach to Belton, In the drizzle and the fog. The old mail coach to Belton Went through an old burnt forest, Past blackened mast and log; But our hearts were gay with the conquest Of the world and all the seas. Our hobnailed shoes were water-soaked, We were mud up to the knees; But with the ancient silken sails, We swept purple seas, For our hearts were tides within us, Greater than all the seas.
Let's sort this out. Make no more cherry scones for the man that stole my jewels and I'll stop spitting in your sherry. Both of us have been fools. Here, you can have my rope and pins if you give up your hooks and nails and we'll agree to wear wide grins for subsequent betrayals. Even a bond as firm as this friendship cannot withstand attacks if they are too direct; let's hiss behind each other's backs. In future, when I tread thick soil into your house, I'll hide my feet, and if you have to be disloyal please try to be discreet.
Strapped down, victim in an old comic book, I have been here before, this place where pain winces off the walls like too bright light. Bear down a doctor says, foreman to sweating laborer, but this work, this forcing of one life from another is something that I signed for at a moment when I would have signed anything. Babies should grow in fields; common as beets or turnips they should be picked and held root end up, soil spilling from between their toes  and how much easier it would be later, returning them to earth. Bear up ... bear down ... the audience grows restive, and I'm a new magician who can't produce the rabbit from my swollen hat. She's crowning, someone says, but there is no one royal here, just me, quite barefoot, greeting my barefoot child.
It might mean immersion, that sign I've used as title, the sign I call a bride after the recessive threads in lace&equals;&equals; the stitches forming deferential space around the firm design. It's the unconsidered mortar between the silo's bricks&equals;&equals;never admired when we admire the holdfast of the tiles (their copper of a robin's breast abstracted into flat). It's a seam made to show, the deckle edge&equals;&equals;constructivist touch. The double equal that's nowhere to be found in math. The dash to the second power&equals;&equals;dash to the max. It might make visible the acoustic signals of things about to flame. It might let thermal expansion be syntactical. Let it add stretch while staying reticent, unspoken as a comma. Don't get angry&equals;&equals;protest&equals;&equals;but a comma seems so natural, you don't see it when you read: it's gone to pure transparency. Yes but. The natural is what poetry contests. Why else the line&equals;&equals;why stanza&equals;&equals;why meter and the rest. Like wheels on snow that leave a wake&equals;&equals;that tread in white without dilapidating mystery&equals;&equals;hinging one phrase to the next&equals;&equals;the brides. Thus wed&equals;&equals;the sentence cannot tell whether it will end or melt or give way to the fabulous&equals;&equals;the snow that is the mortar between winter's bricks&equals;&equals;the wick that is the white between the ink
At night Amanda's eyes are rage red with toy worlds inside. Head on they rummage the dark of the paddock like twin cigars but flicker at the edges with the shyer tongues of the spirit lamp. There's little enough for her to see: my white shirt, the sleeves rolled high, two flaps of stale bread in my fish paws. I can't sleep. I have come back from the feed-bag-checkered restaurant from the pale loose tears of my dearest friend her blue eyes sinking into the highball glass her eyeballs clinking on ice and her mouth drawn down in the grand comedy of anguish. Today a sparrow has been put in the hawk's hands and in the net a monarch crazes its wings on gauze. A doe run down by the dogs commonly dies of fright before its jugular opens at the fang hole. In my friend's eyes, hunger holds an empty rice bowl. O Amanda, burn out my dark. Press the warm suede of your horseflesh against my cold palm. Take away all that is human.
what happened to me. it isn't only this war in vietnam. it's the war of my blood, the small wars in immaculate labs, the war of children in the flesh of assaba, the wars in cosmos over the heads of philosophers. death, magnetic void of my balance, beloved one of my sanity, your silk shoes are soft in the dreams of my brothers. you finish the milk in the glass of the rebellious husband and give sleep to his pain-ridden mate. don't touch me, i am your holy mouth
Errant above the clover The white butterflies hover. Otherwise nothing changes From here to the farthest ranges. The red barn and the little House and the toy cattle Stand in formal rightness Under the noon's brightness. The bullfrog sings in the mire, The laborer at his hire, The robin sings at her singing, The sparrowbird at her winging, The cowbell at its ringing. The old Ford sings at his wheezing, The old dog at his sneezing. The grasshopper sings at his leaping, The poet at his weeping. The trees sing at their sighing.
there is no permission, we are hunger &amp; we need, we love we penetrate where the human arms light up, flames in their fingers, the dark stairs up to the actdeedwork finally done in the first doing we broken winded cracking our knees on the stepsjointshallways where all the ape madonnas gibber us on to that undeclared room hermetic hotel one woman out of all the horde of dry-gourd virgins place to which we gutting our last breath discover we <> find do come there &amp; the light is all in us because we are I am the only fountain of light where is your city thengentle spidermild ape leading me on I smash your dissimilar skull AbaddonUnvortexPimpleDry Umbilicus link to the dead garden reel down the steps through me through my dimensions so I can come to her as it is written in all the books of birds &amp; burnt bones as it writes itself this second up the slow stairsno power in the moon no tide in the live oceanOkeanos is beyond the moon we lift ourselves in life waterspout upagainst the legend of your cosmological despair take the moon inside come to the woman moon inside brightness beyond permission garden in the heart beyond the heart
o rv ge ah te nil IwIe BOCct oVEth dorg omii wicn nny gbb i r d s I put my ner ves over my eyes my veins over my skin and think HA! Idecipher the talk of the gods!
music and painting and all that That's all they thought of in Puerto Rico in the old Spanish days when she was a girl So that now she doesn't know what to do with herself alone and growing old up here  Green is green  but the tag ends of older things,  must withstand rebuffs from that which returns to the beginnings  Or what? a  clean air, high up, unoffended by gross odors
Green gowned, the hairy arm works over the tabletop, magical chants over the boy, chants between breaths  He fills the tube with new air in this premature corridor, pure crystalized lungs backed up in protein. Paradigm, turning, with his windbags clogged this son gives out only as the blood vessels break into chant: green man, sidekick, father, <>
This morning an asteroid just missed the earth it could have flattened Manhattan and drowned the Cape but it just skated by us into space. The radio man says  you and I, we rate enough to rattle down Route 6 in the old truck while the white April light hits the dash like silk poured over a seamstress' table? We make it home to punch down the dough, hear the radio lady say  to wonder: What if this bullyboy asteroid hits the next universe on the list and head-ons their earth, kills couples making love for the first shy time, kills women in labor with the baby's head crowning, kills dad who stations the kids on the sofa and points his shotgun between their Dresden pink ears, kills mom who screams, I threw all the ammo in the woods, you bastard kills the offspring who toughed it out to ride down the shore road lovers kills them as they make promises even they believe are keepable, kills them as they renege, abandon each other, kills them as grief pounds over them like surf. I ask my teacher about this. He laughs. He knows how to sit in a cell for three lone years and survive on cabbage. He says, Nothing exists anyway no, this rare day will not abide, soon as you see it, Phet! it's gone all things are impermanent. Then he says, Sit down, drink tea. Because maybe next time not so lucky, maybe next time I'll spy you bouncing up in the old truck, and when the green says GO you'll smile once, ease her up into first, and me I'll have to keep right on walking.
A field is &ldquo;orderd&rdquo; if the sizes of its elements can be compared. The sizes of its elements cannot be compared.For in the Eye of the Creator the trembling of a leaf in the roar of gun-fire, the fall of a tree,strikes dismay. A thousand men go into the dirt and flood to die having nor name nor proportion in their numbers.We lose count.An army  a single man rising rememberdfalling back  I do not know who he is   where he is  cries out. Is it &dollar;17 million a day, a million men finally to be laid down in wager? There is no Limit. The hydra breaks from his confines into Day's palaces as many heads as he wants (he moves the living bodies of men forward to fill the gap&point;) to win.Destroying fields of rice, villages, bridges, factories, defenses ... At the Grand Poker Table, burning heads of their stogies illustrating the battlefields, eyes of that entitycounting on the play his hands shuffling the cards, beyond number.
In the orchard the old crones sit on cane chairs. They are like the decaying pears-some fuzz And the strangest russet of ear wax matter relaxed Along a curve. In the purple rows of charged gladiolas, the docile Wasps are tossed about, Almost biblical, they're making paper in their mouths. Before the rosebank and distant cattails, bean plants With bits of string and poles Become the lean, sychophant monastics To whom the asylum is willed ... The Abbot visits these grounds, not knowing of Van Gogh. The Abbot, stung by wasps, died slowly of blood poisoning. The other one, Van Gogh, Died on our sun and was buried there in the snow.
 Flock on flock agitated, stimulated, trying to get off the ground   fevers and guttering fires and thunders ebbing, snakes wriggling in the nest, miniscule twists all over the silkworm frames. Family pantomimists in a row  and a leaking roof corner.  Pronouncements promulgated in accents of the personal letter,  and so the squares fill for lay sermons in the rhythms of exorcism promoting bearskins and the toothed capes of tigers. Forehooves hobbled  by the relay post, millet fading  by the void warden's hut, manure drying  over unbroadened ground  heap up boundary stones but unbar the door, put some metal in your mouth and get going,  shoot your horse through the gate  there is no visiting card to the endless spaces, and yet  the lute shines under running winds,  the ladle hangs among star dragons.
<> Thinking, perhaps, of bygone things and dear, Come you from lands so very far from here As unto us who watch your port would show? For that you weep not outright, filing slow Thro' the mid-highway of this city drear, You even as gentle stranger-folk appear, Who of the common sorrow nothing know! Would you but linger, would you but be told, Pledge with its thousand sighs my soul doth give That you, likewise, should travel on heart-broken: Ah, we have lost our Beatrice! Behold, What least soever word be of her spoken, The tears must follow now from all that live.
The slimed embrasures of old fortress walls Green lower-lipped outside Saint Anna Bay Cannot articulate: this hoarse wind smells Of oil; two hundred tankers night and day Hod El Dorado past the Bridge of Boats Up the foul stream and down. The Dutch fa&ccedil;ades Cold and small as coral are the sights Most photographed: but memory knows no aids One mile from Willemstad (past midnight, that Refiner's fire across the basin mimes Hell but fools nobody) while we set foot Again on the low desolate slope whose name's Nothing and nowhere: fingering the leaf-shuttered Inconsequence of streets. For the wind here's Close and vigilant, misses no flitted Grain or leaf, watches each step, cares For every stone in Hoogstraat. Have we lived Anywhere if not here, walking alone Through dreams or deaths awake, having arrived One hour ago, by morning to be gone?
see with the eyes of a horse whose irises are rows of blue flowers the world is green and edible see with the small eyes of a pig the world is dim and narrow people are tall and hungry see with the isinglass eye of an old stove while the fire in its belly looks out at a combustible world see with the eye of a window facing east light and darkness rising never coming down again see with the eyes of a believer who does not believe what he sees but sees what he believes see with the eyes of a painter who paints what he cannot see until he has painted it see with the practical eye of a woman's sex the world is hard but not durable fails when most needed see with the curious eye of a man's sex many worlds full of mystery the same secret hidden in each see with the eyes of a lover who sees his reflection in a thumbnail and falls in love see with the eyes of a prophet who sees a hammer approaching a thumbnail and a new nail growing beneath it see with the bright eye of a lake the sky and reflect it the mountains and reflect them see with the dark eye of a lake great depths where fish undulate let that eye go to sleep at night while the other eye stays open a trap for the moon
At first you're Ophelia  belly, ribcage, whole being sucked down. But your pale lilac limbs, the autumn bush of your head bloom in the water. The fear hardening your flesh, the fear chaining you to dim stifling rooms, begins to liquify. Terrifying compartments forget partitions. The floor sprawls, talks blue and mustard mosaics. Tiles, let loose to the ceiling, praise the garden: buddleia purple, delphinium, chrysanthemum gold. Beyond glass: those avenues to emptiness, all their branches that deny sky, pester wrists, invade waist and thighs are smoothed into silence. Your small dependable dog is a motif stamped on the mat. The bath soft as kid, lip folded back, will peel off easily as an evening gown. This dream of colourdots, daubs is so persuasive it raises you from the indelible sadnesses within and you are scented with light.
In the irruptive mode I wear no hat &amp; hate what I see in the rearview mirror except silver balls. When I was all the rage I was in disruptive mode &amp; wore the instructions on my Reeboks to a frazzle between the lines of what everybody read and the high- way stripes painted there. Actually shoes in those days had no names but I was futurist. Mealtimes at Hojo's &amp; Wendy's the plastic tablecloths had squares in them and squares in them and the prices were cheap obsessively and people in those days laughed until their faces became tic-tac-toe boards &amp; few could tell death to shut up. Life was no fucking (pre)text. Menus with everything under one dollar were not unknown. Anyway, only the greatest could write it down. I was among them. Since then, volcanoes were miniaturized, everyone gets to be a little sick. I know everyone who works here, they are not happy. I wear a dunce cap.
Hard water (water- falls) in the sheet of the waterface a clambering gnat hard water (water- falls) the cliff holding the streaming of the loving flesh up Across the valley, I the lover, and she, the beloved, view each other I hold her as hard as I can in my arms
Diversify the abyss with Now and Then, Add There to Here, and to the resulting What Give motion, sound and color, within a law Of circles, tiny to infinite. Furious bells, Bawling like cherubim in convocation Will clamor then forever; fires as strange As Lucifer's eyes when he marches before the armies, Pulsate and flash. It will be splendid magic, As if I threw this staff upon the ground And a snake went forth like the thing under the lintel That peers at the visitor. Take then this vial  But secretly, for some will be envious  Of a brew I concocted from love and nullity And the juice of an odd flower that grew in the yard When I first came here, and is still rooted and breathing  And scatter the stuff upon the stairs of space. Ha ha! I believe you will see in a wink a wonder: Sudden creatures, swimming, crawling or upright  The last with what secret desires I do not know. Perhaps he will fling you from your bed, Gabriel  Or (what strong magic!) strike even My hand.
Old katydids in the West Tulsa night! Refineries burning off their oil in fiery pools. Uncle Henry holding a picket sign in wind that whipped him. At night, on his shoulder, holding hair, I stooped through the doorway of the soup kitchen where we bent over a long table, eating soup, a family of hundreds, and went back for more. Tell me again where my father's supposed to be. Aunt Edris, your great swinging breasts were pendulum of time too I see now, but then this small boy wished to press his cheeks against you, and couldn't tell you, and you were young, though I didn't know it then, laughing that Henry's toes were cold. Your bed sounded warm, through that curtain that hung between us. On the floor we children threw cockroaches from us, the only ones who loved our bodies, and heard your giggles, tickles, guessed at your rolling movements, tried to ape them on our own flat bodies. But you turned into a dolphin in the night, swam as we could not, bore Henry through the tossing waves, then wept. More whys and wherefores to puzzle us! The smell of your biscuits woke us and you put us on the ice-cold table while we watched you move in flannel about those warped linoleum floors. The oven had a handle made of coiled and gleaming wires. Only for you would I run those errands through ditches to bring back butter that was not butter, had no color; and later Henry left the picket lines and his face became something that we always feared. He threatened to throw us off the bridge. Fourth of July he threw firecrackers at us, had the dog chase us round and round the house, under clotheslines. Unwanted. So be it. But you I still want. And dear woman find in the face of my own beloved whose face is round as a biscuit, like yours, and smiling, for she won't mistreat me. Take me again, Edris, out to the outhouse, in the rain, stepping from plank to plank. It's our house, of cracked and rotting wood. The lightning shows your face up close. You hold me in your arms, and step lightly, shaking, avoiding spiders, and the years.
Jesus is born. Peace, such high words forbear, Which only angel's mouth deserves to unfold. Then let them speak these mysteries enrolled. Ay me, they must be sung of that sweet choir. Then let mine ears that blessed carol hear. No, only holy shepherds be so bold. With joy then let them hear this uncontrolled. Nor so, for holy shepherds hear with fear. Ay me, that am unworthy him to name, Yet none so worthy to be named as he, Ay me, unworthy for to hear the same, Yet nothing so deserveth heard to be. What then? Compare both these, his worth, my scorn; His far weigheth down: Jesus is born.
Have you done what you have done  have you said what you have said  you need us too This does not move  when we are mad  we do not think of it He as we find him  makes each black wreck more clear  in light seen once Of memory of day  we calm our need with our sense  if he does as we would You need us too  take nothing  we shall not give
Folds on your shirt lie like shadows who hide me before she's leaving You know she's leaving. The flag signals us to mask and cross a plank so that the transition will be easier, less visual The sun has moved a bit and sadness takes on new shapes You say &ldquo;Her shape sleeps in me and the world explodes around her until every atom resembles the match trick she taught us last night&rdquo; We translated the dream before she left then waited in the park by the dock under shadows that were increasing on your shirt as the sun grew feeble Now she sends us postcards of sky &amp; sea that say: &ldquo;I have had crazy dreams lately! Last night I was dead and my skin was the color of this picture.&rdquo;
For hours I sit here facing the white wall and the dirty swallows. If I move too much, I will lose everything, if I even breathe, I'll lose the round chest and the forked tail and the nest above the window, under the ceiling. As far as shame, I think I have lived too long with only the moonlight coming in to worry too much about what it looks like. I have given a part of my mind away, for what it's worth I have traded half of what I have  I'll call it half so I can see these smudges in the right light. I think I live in ruins like no one else, I see myself as endlessly staring at what I lost, I see me mourning for hours, either worn away with grief or touched with simple regret, but free this time to give myself up to loss alone. I mourn for the clumsy nest and I mourn for the two small birds sitting up there above the curtains watching  as long as I am there and I mourn for the sky that makes it clear and I mourn for my two eyes that drag me over, that make me sit there singing, or mumbling or murmuring, at the cost of almost everything else, my two green eyes, my brown my hazel, flecked with green and brown  and this is what I'll do for twenty more years, if I am lucky even if I'm not I'll live with the swallows and dip through the white shadows and rest on the eaves and sail above the window. This is the way I  for more than twenty years for more than forty  out of this darkness; it was almost a joy, almost a pleasure, not to be foolish or maudlin, sitting against my wall, closing my eyes, singing my dirges.
The hot sunflowers by the glaring pike  Lift shields of sultry brass; the teasel tops, Pink-thorned, advance with bristling spike on spike  Against the furious sunlight. Field and copse  Are sick with summer: now, with breathless stops, The locusts cymbal; now grasshoppers beat  Their castanets: and rolled in dust, a team,   Like some mean life wrapped in its sorry dream,  An empty wagon rattles through the heat. Where now the blue, blue flags? the flow'rs whose mouths  Are moist and musky? Where the sweet-breathed mint, That made the brook-bank herby? Where the South's  Wild morning-glories, rich in hues, that hint  At coming showers that the rainbows tint? Where all the blossoms that the wildwood knows?  The frail oxalis hidden in its leaves;  The Indian-pipe, pale as a soul that grieves; The freckled touch-me-not and forest rose. Dead! dead! all dead beside the drouth-burnt brook,  Shrouded in moss or in the shriveled grass. Where waved their bells, from which the wild-bee shook  The dew-drop once, gaunt, in a nightmare mass,  The rank weeds crowd; through which the cattle pass, Thirsty and lean, seeking some meagre spring,  Closed in with thorns, on which stray bits of wool  The panting sheep have left, that sought the cool, From morn till evening wearily wandering. No bird is heard; no throat to whistle awake  The sleepy hush; to let its music leak Fresh, bubble-like, through bloom-roofs of the brake:  Only the green-blue heron, famine-weak,   Searching the stale pools of the minnowless creek,  Utters its call; and then the rain-crow, too,  False prophet now, croaks to the stagnant air;  While overhead, still as if painted there,  A buzzard hangs, black on the burning blue.
In the silence of flowers is found a sacred love That changes the future. Being is, for its own road, the end If some grace grants it Fragrance and quiet. Sweet blood explodes upon the tongue When you break The body of fruit: This is the word, vivid and absolute With which each tree tries out its virtue. Man is mystic tree and barely grasps Space and Time if he can turn himself Into soul's flower and veins' fruit; For, from his double essence, unconfused The bees of death draw honey And the roses of life their fragrance.
For a while I shall still be leaving, Looking back at you as you slip away Into the magic islands of the mind. But for a while now all alive, believing That in a single poignant hour We did say all that we could ever say In a great flowing out of radiant power. It was like seeing and then going blind. After a while we shall be cut in two Between real islands where you live And a far shore where I'll no longer keep The haunting image of your eyes, and you, As pupils widen, widen to deep black And I am able neither to love or grieve Between fulfillment and heartbreak. The time will come when I can go to sleep. But for a while still, centered at last, Contemplate a brief amazing union, Then watch you leave and then let you go. I must not go back to the murderous past Nor force a passage through to some safe landing, But float upon this moment of communion Entranced, astonished by pure understanding  Passionate love dissolved like summer snow.
These days Lifting myself up Like a heavy weight, Old camel getting to her knees, I think of my mother And the inexhaustible flame That kept her alive Until she died. She knew all about fatigue And how one pushes it aside For staking up the lilies Early in the morning, The way one pushes it aside For a friend in need, For a hungry cat. Mother, be with me. Today on your birthday I am older than you were When you died Thirty-five years ago. Thinking of you The old camel gets to her knees, Stands up, Moves forward slowly Into the new day. If you taught me one thing It was never to fail life.
Behind a department store whose glassy face displays on Market Street, a one-way alley stretches a block at a time through the city. Out of sight and mind, with butts and wine, it's here the morning drunks slump as papers blown from refuse boxes scrape along the asphalt, stiff as crabs. Because it's quieter here in the corridor of red brick walls like cliffs, I sometimes eat propped against a knobby fire-plug's stump on the curb, killing time. The men around watch as I wad up the sack, toss it onto the street. While it crawls along in the wind, I sit with the others empty-handed. Hunched like men at a beach, we listen and watch. We wait.
A pit as black as the secret bubble of a coal lump, geode-brilliant and shimmering as the heart's wet valves, where a simple bird hungry enough to eat anything would not go: this is something like what I woke in, and there were many of us hugging those walls, our mouths suddenly open as if to say what we had always meant. I wish I could tell you it was not dawn with the sun's pale yellow racing down, for some cannot believe death comes in the milkman's hour or that it is, like the wife in her gown, sleepless, out pruning the roses although no one is expected. Have you thought such a place could be, without your knowing it, just there in your yard? I don't want to alarm you, but the shadows flickering through the locust so the green and gray light falls on your face, what do they mean? And is your child only sleeping as precise as a glass statue this glary morning?
Lord of the Oversoul, high Power! a part Of life's great purposes! bright Essence, bound To lofty deeds; one with Earth's common round, Having dominion o'er the human heart, Through whom you build your worlds without a sound  Keep those in mind, in whom the rare seeds start Of beauty; dreams, that mortals christen Art, And Love, of which great Nature is the ground. Exert for them that power, held on high! And wield your sceptre for their strength of mind! Sustain their weakness! shield the instrument Through which you labor, from the needs that lie Around all life! and in a way as kind Fulfill your purpose of divine intent.
As he passes the open door he can see there is no long- er anyone in the roomno one is lying in the bed and no one is attending the recum- bent figurethe water glass with its bent drinking straw is gone from the bedside ta- blethere are no flowers in the vase none of her fa- vorite red and blue anemo- nesthe window shades have been raised because the room need no longer be kept darkenednow sun- light is flooding the roomin its neatness and emptiness it is for him a scene of terror what can he do with what is left of his life?
In Massaccio's  <> how benign the angel seems, like a good civil servant he is merely enforcing the rules. I remember these faces from Fine Arts 13. I was young enough then to think that the loss of innocence was just about Sex. Now I see Eve covering her breasts with her hands and I know it is not to hide them but only to keep them from all she must know is to follow from Abel on one, Cain on the other.
Sheltered under thick thatch, The paper walls Slide open To bring those ancient members of the family, Twelve plum trees, Into the house, Their gnarled black trunks And their translucent flowers. Two pots of pink cyclamen And a parti-colored cat Sun themselves On the lintel. I sit on a cushion Facing a brilliant wall of books And look out sideways, Floated between House and garden In the spring air. Rushing into the house To get bird-glasses, I forgot to take off my shoes  Profanation Of the clean, sweet-smelling Grass mats. Later, Having worn socks Into the garden, I brought bits of dry grass Onto the velvety blue rug In the Western-style room. Twice shamed!
A neighbourly sherbet fountain coats this barbed-wire fence with sugar-loaf. It glints and tinkles. Greek garden nymphs are painted  black pubic hair, red plastic tits. Next door slim pink flamingoes pick an exiled banker's lawn for bits of lobster bisque. When curved beaks hit old booby traps these birds explode like soft pink sunsets over pink gins. On darkening hills gold golf-carts chase white atoms into space. O endlessly the perfect tee-shots click like Vegas chicks going down the strip in high-heels with the lights ablaze.
In the high leaves of a walnut, On the very topmost boughs, A boy that climbed the branching bole His cradled limbs would house. On the airy bed that rocked him Long, idle hours he'd lie Alone with white clouds sailing The warm blue of the sky. I remember not what his dreams were; But the scent of a leaf's enough To house me higher than those high boughs In a youth he knew not of, In a light that no day brings now But none can spoil or smutch, A magic that I felt not then And only now I touch.
The lovers, fast in their longing, Lay high on their hill and looked out into March: Fields all flooded and the rutty lanes, Three farms, two teams, Kites set to the wind, and the kiter's cry. Lay high on their hill and looked out into spring, The sensitive season, Their throats so throbbing, And their thieving thighs, Lax on the hill in the thoughtless weather, Their listless love. Looked out into spring and the open air, The lying lovers, Beholding through their unseeing eyes New form for old fancy, Dawdling their languor, Nursing the slow and crowning mood For the push past gingham to the sprawling hug Where each tries each, And the shy recessive sex, Grown bold and brutal, Meets its own coarse kind.
Two W. P. A. men stood in the new sluiceway overlooking the river  One was pissing while the other showed by his red jagged face the immemorial tragedy of lack-love while an old squint-eyed woman in a black dress and clutching a bunch of late chrysanthemums to her fatted bosoms turned her back on them at the corner
<>  Thy tides and winds and seasons whisper, &ldquo;Fate  Has held us dumb through centuries of hate,  And tears, and blood for things of little worth.&rdquo; The heart can understand, since Lilith's mirth  Shivered the early echoes, half in scorn,  The world-wide leap of light from every dawn,  Day's dying pomp around thy blood-drenched girth. Across thy theatre pageants come and pass:  The power and pride of man, a scenic thing,  Frames forth his glory in enduring brass; And through his dust I hear the whispering  Of lifted waters, and a blade of grass  Breaking the murmur-laden breast of Spring.
The fierce musical cries of a couple of sparrowhawks hunting on the headland, Hovering and darting, their heads northwestward, Prick like silver arrows shot through a curtain the noise of the ocean Trampling its granite; their red backs gleam Under my window around the stone corners; nothing gracefuller, nothing Nimbler in the wind. Westward the wave-gleaners, The old gray sea-going gulls are gathered together, the northwest wind wakening Their wings to the wild spirals of the wind-dance. Fresh as the air, salt as the foam, play birds in the bright wind, fly falcons Forgetting the oak and the pinewood, come gulls From the Carmel sands and the sands at the river-mouth, from Lobos and out of the limitless Power of the mass of the sea, for a poem Needs multitude, multitudes of thoughts, all fierce, all flesh-eaters, musically clamorous Bright hawks that hover and dart headlong, and ungainly Gray hungers fledged with desire of transgression, salt slimed beaks, from the sharp Rock-shores of the world and the secret waters.
Who are these women and offices that control the will of the dead graduates? They come to dinner like swimmers assembling before a final race Now coffins are lined up outside where campus elms seize precedence over girls Now offices are closed for the afternoon in correspondence with the courts and the pool Now because instructed the sky changes hands shuffling wills that are transferred to file cards behind locked doors These vendetta women will not be put off Now I write like this because it could happenMy will weakens Is there a choice? the alternative lies on the other side of the poem.
Since each old scar on my face seems a stone pillar sunk below now tiered and gardened gradations, discovering that caves of ruins were filler in the making of this villa's new foundations seems a natural progression toward this elegant f&ecirc;te where you, my former love, my ex-founder, are bent toward the opalescent skin below the eyes of a Roman beauty. Your self-satisfied sound of expansion to her flutter-laughter jars the settings down the long table to where I am seated between bored merchants. What I feel makes me despair of what I feel: she is of god. Depleted in my own planned vista, hurt and angry, I am so human all I make is from a dying world. You are a child in her goddess arms twirled. Her face is a caper furled in its flower. My hands fly batlike to my scars.
How do we know, by the bank-high river,  Where the mired and sulky oxen wait, And it looks as though we might wait for ever,  How do we know that the floods abate? There is no change in the current's brawling   Louder and harsher the freshet scolds; Yet we can feel she is falling, falling,  And the more she threatens the less she holds. Down to the drift, with no word spoken,  The wheel-chained wagons slither and slue ... <>  And lash your leaders! we're through we're through! How do we know, when the port-fog holds us  Moored and helpless, a mile from the pier, And the week-long summer smother enfolds us   How do we know it is going to clear? There is no break in the blindfold weather,  But, one and another, about the bay, The unseen capstans clink together,  Getting ready to go up and away. A pennon whimpers the breeze has found us   A headsail jumps through the thinning haze. The whole hull follows, till broad around us   The clean-swept ocean says: &lsquo;Go your ways!&rsquo; How do we know, when the long fight rages,  On the old, stale front that we cannot shake, And it looks as though we were locked for ages,  How do we know they are going to break? There is no lull in the level firing,  Nothing has shifted except the sun. Yet we can feel they are tiring, tiring   Yet we can tell they are ripe to run. Something wavers, and, while we wonder,  Their centre-trenches are emptying out, And, before their useless flanks go under,  Our guns have pounded retreat to rout!
Cretaceous bird, your giant claw no lime From bark of holly bruised or mistletoe Could have arrested, could have held you so Through fifty million years of jostling time; Yet cradled with you in the catholic slime Of the young ocean's tepid lapse and flow Slumbered an agent, weak in embryo, Should grip you straitly, in its sinewy prime. What bright collision in the zodiac brews, What mischief dimples at the planet's core For shark, for python, for the dove that coos Under the leaves? what frosty fate's in store For the warm blood of man, man, out of ooze But lately crawled, and climbing up the shore?
Surgical piano the tune neatly lifted away from the music till penetrating furthest abscesses of thought the surgeon abolishes the complexity he thinks he is left with something bare somehow impressive young women swoon when they look at it but turn away for example to Chopin leaving their cut-off locks &amp; lunar blood at the shrine of rubato which brings all formal things to life they think I have not been clear it is not about women &amp; men not about pianos it is not about music it is something happens inside the head when at morning I think but music is &amp; this is not about anything I think not about anything but it gets there the way baserunners or pianists do up &amp; down the scales: ladders going somewhere &amp; coming back angels in moonlight the girl next door eloping in a cartoon.
&amp; vanish to Casper, the Grasslands, Otsego County the voice demands dinner &amp; how shall I survive? I unfold this in plunges in the company of flesh &amp; willful concertos gold hair'd angel infancy demanding summer's honey breath these people storm into my life &amp; beat the wind with blows Salt Lake City is transported further from my sight to Truckee where it's taking him Love alters not wetness in words eyes flashing she drives upon the buffalo caressed you curiously, gush history but lie here with the gold wild Indian don't move like stallions or did, my heart not shoulder high this heart moves its head from side to side opens doors or sets a clock authority dream figures, hallucinations your transparent skin, Pale Traveler. Dear D: this may be said to be ready and if resisting, have no thought but face a roof of notes above the world.
I shall not see the end of this unweaving. I shall lie dead in any narrow ditch Before they are unwoven, love and grieving, And our lives separated stitch by stitch. I shall be dead before this task is done, Not for a moment give you your cool head. Say we had twenty years and now have none  Are you Old Fate itself to snap the thread, And to cut both your life and mine in half Before the whole design is written clear? This tapestry will not unweave itself, Nor I spend what is left of me to tear Your bright thread out: let unfulfilled design Stand as your tragic epitaph, and mine.
In my best dream I have crossed the border and my coins are wrong. Without the tongue I gesture, sweat and wake aboard this boat. Ladies in their staterooms write bad poems  mountains in the distance evidence of God. Maps are hard to read. Two nations own these islands. The shade of green on one could be Canadian, but firs and grebes are mine. The latest run of Springs are far too international to claim. Yet they use our rivers for their graves. The law protects the San Juans. No bilge here. Gulls still trail the ferry but go hungry. You can buy an island. In my worst dream I am living here, contented and alone. That house is mine. The blue smoke rising means I'm cooking. Constant knock of water means I'm drunk, enjoying private jokes and bowing as the walls begin to roar. The Coast Guard breezes by my door. They haven't stopped to chat in twenty years. In no dream I am standing on this deck admiring the sheep on what turns out to be the final island before landing. I woke up dead among these islands  this boat chugging in a bad direction  the north I go, my wake already fading.
As a Buddhist tried for months to visualize a small gold Bodhisattva on the air I benignly conjure up this couple, his arms about her, free of trouble. They're young and smiling, apple clean, whose embraces gave my shining hair, and she is both his piano and his cello, which are played with fingers, light arpeggios now and then, rough gutsy rubbing of the belly when it's night. And how well I know, in cold December, the poor lived better, in glowing embers of their kindling crates than we did wrapped in our clawed-up gramma's quilts. In the decades later they still obsess us so that daily we forgive them and daily don't, and in a field may find them still, blue in paired flowers, their love transposed and borne beyond a billion rocks, and time, or they're caught within a cave by those who knew them before us, suffering sister, who wept in the Oklahoma night, And I smile to see our mother still, cradling the steaming soup, straight down the hill, to the wretched poor who huddled there while we at home, brother, sister, sucked the bloody air.
Why does my heart beat so? Did not a shadow pass? It passed but a moment ago. Who can have trod in the grass? What rogue is night-wandering? Have not old writers said That dizzy dreams can spring From the dry bones of the dead? And many a night it seems That all the valley fills With those fantastic dreams. They overflow the hills, So passionate is a shade, Like wine that fills to the top A grey-green cup of jade, Or maybe an agate cup.
I will grieve alone, As I strolled alone, years ago, down along The Ohio shore. I hid in the hobo jungle weeds Upstream from the sewer main, Pondering, gazing. I saw, down river, At Twenty-third and Water Streets By the vinegar works, The doors open in early evening. Swinging their purses, the women Poured down the long street to the river And into the river. I do not know how it was They could drown every evening. What time near dawn did they climb up the other shore, Drying their wings? For the river at Wheeling, West Virginia, Has only two shores: The one in hell, the other In Bridgeport, Ohio. And nobody would commit suicide, only To find beyond death Bridgeport, Ohio.
It is a sacrilege in form I fear, To make this photograph of him and thee, From my own sunny south sent north to me, In all my heart my own Madonna, dear; Yet Raph&aelig;l could paint no face or brow To make me worship it with glory lit, Although the Holy Virgin sat for it, As I do this, our baby's face and thou. Though priests my worship may condemn to scorn, I think the virgin with her mother love, The Babe of Bethlehem, of woman born, And later all my sins and sorrows bore, If my great love for thee they watch above, For it they both are pleased and love me more.
I used to think he was naturally like that  imperious, categorical, always in the wrong <> who could talk about opera and French mustard as if they were the same sort of thing, banging the table, saying &lsquo;Come off it, old boy! I'm your father, remember?&rsquo; clapping his hands and when a waiter busied round his chair, saying &lsquo;Steady on, you're not a knife-thrower. Now go out to the kitchen and start again.&rsquo; When I stole a comb from the Gentlemen's in the Savoy he made me take it back. If I'd only murdered the attendant, all would have been forgiven. I used to think he was naturally like that.
As I gazed across the mountains  Thunders prowled the dusty plain, And on its dust the jetty fountains  Squandered gems. The land seemed Spain. I laughed to watch my comrade glancing  Through his verse of rubric red, In sun and dusty jewels dancing,  A snow-dove circling round his head! Faint wood-peckering! Round him gusty  Sea-guns flickered. Rose-red fans Of fire roaring, vast and dusty,  Thundered a darkness that was man's. Silence, death, beneath the cloud-dome.  I saw the radiant round moon swerve Her vast glow on the gold transparent  Bubble of that glassy curve, Where in moonlight he lay sleeping;  A corpse-rick was my comrade's bed; His gems were tears of the weeping,  And on his breast his dove lay dead. I swooned to see that moonlit body,  And soon the giant earth-worm wave Well-fed from the bones of beauty  Magnified upon his grave. I bled, I woke upon the mountains.  Did I see his snow-dove leave her cave? On the sunlit plain were those his fountains  That gushed new jewels round his grave?
loosestrife in cammocky meadows the yellow circulation noon all day long the purple spikes as if a brother waited in the tent and over there <> I wake with your kiss on my mouth napping sun caught cloudless just into twilight I am everything that I believe there is no difference theology is ontology mute children hurry by the fence or exhausted emulous of adult lassitude sit by corner stores clearly sprouts of this divine escapade when Israel went out of Egypt and led us here not out of heart not out of mind whose hand enoughs us for a thousand schemes in exile's excitement cry out that mind has a many-folded hand adept at why and this citizen is always me when he wants to speak of something real he says a fox a grape a stone a name he happens to remember he barks at new arrivers and tenderly administers all personal pass&eacute; to neutral time night of Turan battle of the hours piano Mozart pouring down the rain receptive furrow till no more rain is a door falls open in the music like Cameron's &ldquo;flowers of snow / that give surcease / to love's sorrow&rdquo; if love were sorrow an operaio astounded at his work a gender pronoun a subway missed late at night no ease in going or in waiting snow flowers down on those lost connections Etruscan Venus whose shrine's a forest wander in the most ordinary rituals blackwards a hint of blood in them aloud red ruffian tenderly unhappy unhappy people bewildered charity of cancelling night where are you to live through in pain this last extortion of delight from the overdetermined planet mind wind its own time stirring elegant weeds bosk all the way back to the stream a bat cross me against the insolent superstitions to look at her freedom as she bends to the work.
At the voice of the mother on a warm hearth,  Dark and firelit, where the hobbed kettle crinkled In the creak and shudder of the rained-on window,  This world had its beginning And was here redeemed. All in that kitchen's warmth, that mother's glow,  Was bless&egrave;d, nothing was abandoned. There God's boy was born, loving, by lantern light,  His church built of the breathing of cattle; Before nightfall all lost in prowling woods were home;  To the dying in cactus land a hand came full of rain; Here a child wept repentant into a Father's breast,  Warm for his childish tears, not bright with stars, Or filled with his suffering that mother's arms  And in the shawls of her prayers and kisses slept. In the kitchen shadow and flicker and warmth,  And the deafening storm, thickening hair by hair Its blinding pelt of tempest on the window panes.
All summer while dry winds ground the grass to chaff I waited for the sound of water but when the rains came they were violent. Now the worst of the heat is over. At sundown the earth cools a little. Mountains to the east turn expensive and funereal, then darken like the huge stone ribs of unfinished cathedrals in Mexico, abandoned to weather since the Revolution. As the light dims it seems that nothing which goes away will ever return. How far the world flows out into itself, yet all the pain I need is here at hand. Now in the middle of this middle age, and paying for the gifts I thought were free, I learn that what teaches me has taught me laughter, charity, and pain of the body: these three and the greatest of these is pain, not a question, but the answer to everything. All other desires must be forgotten, all other needs put aside until that lover has his way with me and is, for awhile, satisfied.
In places like Selma, Alabama, Kids say, <> <> In places like Chicago and New York Kids say, <> <> In places like London and Paris Kids say, <> <>
The next best thing to the human tear Is the human smile Which beams at us reflected white For a lunar while. But smiles congeal. Two eyes alight With water cannot glow for long, And a better thing than the human tear Is the human song. If cigarette or city burn The smoke breaks into air. So your breath, cries and laughter turn And are abandoned there. Once I had everything to learn And thought each book had pretty pages. Now I don't even trust the sun Which melts like butter through the ages. Nevertheless, crack-voiced I'll sing For you, who drink the generous light Till, fat as happiness, you sing Your gay, immortal appetite. I bring you air, food, grass and rain, Show you the breast where you belong. You take them all and sing again Your human song.
<> And left it to huddle, untended Under the hill, companioned by only a fence That never was mended. The dead boughs twist and slant in the bloom of the year. White petals drift and scatter With no one to measure the coming yield or to think That apples matter In a year or a life. But the orchard puts forth its fruit, And in time the apples tumble, Slice open and crush on a stone or smother in grass. A man might stumble On meanings here, as well as on orchard hummocks. With even the fence uncaring, The trees will blossom and yield until petals are ended And ended the bearing.
<> Spun from you, bobbin of bone, ghostbody in the sun? Enumerate your keen, wind-feathered Moods up-tossed and patterned in swift weather With colors of skirts and flowers; And those more constant images that serve To guide the blinded time: the scent of sickness Over blankets in a cold room, the shades drawn At evening, rosaries told years ago By mild hands motionless or moving Wisely in soft light, and the strange house in spring With dust under the canvas bellies of the chairs, The new screens painted and the flowering wind ... You are grown old to be thus disembodied By a few dreams pulled gently, and would be Thinned out of mind if I should sever in you The nervous strand of sorrow. God be with you; When I have touched this only I shall leave you, And walk very gladly and quietly out of doors, My trousers rustling round my legs like leaves In the slow autumn air, the still fountains.
One-third of the house is hanging in the air, or seems to hang, seems ready to buckle the six slender jacks underneath we had to correct two hundred years of shifting on this hill, the sills laid in sand and left there, four warped timbers that frame us as we sleep, frost pressing every winter on every wall, so far away from the mild Virginia evenings, the doves calling softly in the field, and my childhood house, its mild human voices. In June, in my garden, hearing a dove across the wooded swell the first I'd heard in this northern latitude I realized that nothing is left to pull me back there but the graves; and like an exile finally turning inland from the shore, I could admit I'm here to stay. So we exposed the rotten wood from outside in, the vast machine laboring in the yard, its prehistoric hand surprisingly agile, tender; and at night can feel that end of the house shuddering up to pitch on the iron rods, as though we had released it, had removed the weights from the swimmer's feet; and the awful dreams have started once again, although I wake to find the children undisturbed. Do they know how soon the dirt mounded on the grass will be shoveled back against the new foundation, the cellarhole tucked in? Already, stone by stone the Polish mason sets us right not on the earth but in it, level where the land is not, squared where it slopes away and plumb to a rule, the line that ties this planet to its star: a line made visible by the string he hangs from the underside of the house, its dependent metal cone an ornament, a pendulum that sways, slows, grows perfectly still to mark the footings here, and here, and here.
Went to see a blues band called the Pete Mitchell Smith Blues Band at the Thurnscoe Hotel, missed the last 212, walked home, Contemplated school names resonating like boat names or the names of fishing flies: Springwood, Upperwood, The Hill, Low Valley, Sacred Heart, Lacewood. I've got conjunctivitis. Entropy and collapse by the Coronation Club, turn on, attracting more, many more than the Pete Mitchell Smith Blues Band. Language falls in on itself. A dead fish falling in the bath. I know this valley like the back of my hand. Look at the back of my hand. It's a mystery to me. A mystery. Your dad's gone fishing. On his own.
More than you love me, very possibly you love the beasts of the field, even, possibly, the field itself, in August dotted with wild chicory and aster: I know. I have compared myself to those flowers, their range of feeling so much smaller and without issue; also to white sheep, actually gray: I am uniquely suited to praise you. Then why torment me? I study the hawkweed, the buttercup protected from the grazing herd by being poisonous: is pain your gift to make me conscious in my need of you, as though I must need you to worship you, or have you abandoned me in favor of the field, the stoic lambs turning silver in twilight; waves of wild aster and chicory shining pale blue and deep blue, since you already know how like your raiment it is.
Picture the grave in his diabolical dream Where death would come with clues and scenery, The bulbous forehead and the crooked mouth Leaking a poison, the translucent hands. Perhaps like Juliet he could come alive To hate Longfellow and to outrage life, But dare not from his wretched rusty stone, Landmark for girls developing in slums. Here he is local color, another crank; Pawnshops and whores and sour little bars Accept him. Neither alarming nor prophetic, He pleases like a wop or a jack-o-lantern. Others uptown forgive his nasty eyes Because he was sick and had a mind to err; But he was never dirty like Hawthorne, But boyish with his spooks and funerals And clammy virgins. What else were his codes But diagrams of hideouts of the mind Plugged up with corpses and expensive junk, Prosopopoeia to keep himself at bay? Think of him as a cicerone with data False as a waxworks and that understood Ask pitifully for pain. Or think that now Four cities claim him as France recommended.
The butcher in China looks long at a bull till he sees the bull and how the beast is jointed, then moves his knife in the spaces he has learned by heart with his hand moving on the bull and the bull is now sirloin, tenderloin, prime rib, dogbone, two horns for weddings or combs, sandals for the pedestrian peasant, saddle and rein for horse, thong and head for kettledrums to scare away eclipses from the sun, ghosts from processions, or summon cities to banquets, friends and enemies to battle, the blood in the bucket ready for sprinkling on children with polio and village borders.
Westward on the high-hilled plains  Where for me the world began, Still, I think, in newer veins  Frets the changeless blood of man. Now that other lads than I  Strip to bathe on Severn shore, They, no help, for all they try,  Tread the mill I trod before. There, when hueless is the west  And the darkness hushes wide, Where the lad lies down to rest  Stands the troubled dream beside. There, on thoughts that once were mine,  Day looks down the eastern steep, And the youth at morning shine  Makes the vow he will not keep.
But not for us. In the sigh of our going lurks all was-not; The instant not ours, Not whole  We too something other, But premature, Before our time. And at that tippage Cry out, complex; Look back and about, Forever elsewhere. Everything drains, Seeps out, weeps away. Everything alters but nothing transforms. We grow old. And the old man gnaws his leathern nail, And the old woman weeps, Inconsolable. Who may be consoled of the unmanageable past That is its answer? Who may be spared that abject subservience? Our sole sadness, Our single sorrow, Our metaphysic, Our whole philosophy. We have none other. And the old man fingers his wart, And the old woman weeps, Each earlier, Each elsewhere, What-not and which-ever Rubbed in the palsied hands, A crotchet reminder. The sigh, The human sound, Adam's answer, The bell's doom, The tocsin's clang: Rhetoric of the unconvinced  Nevermore.
Wisely New Zealanders have chosen not to let our ships into their harbors, for weapons aboard may well bring disaster, explode at any moment or leak poisons onto their streets. Sailors might track the dust of hell into a port town, as they have done in Scotland and Spain. At the least these cities would become targets centered and triangulated like ours. They would share Armageddon, meanwhile have to get used to living on bull's-eyes, as we do. So they have taken their stand though much assailed by strident defenders of the nuclear faith. And yet our invasion is successful, for we have deployed in every living room a horse glassy-eyed, warriors inside. In a frenzy they leap out day and night, fire at random. Wild shots and the car chase assault every child. Like viewers back home they watch women tortured. A thousand murders take place every month, right in the living room. Item tonight, just for instance: a woman lost in a morgue, prying jaws of each corpse open, looking for drugs hidden there. A man stalks her with scalpel, slashes her throat. A ribbon of blood slaps the wall. It is not known what this does to the mind, watching year after year. Light beams sharp as lasers seek the back of each brain, burn in each image, leave stains for life. Soon the kids watching have caught all our madness, vowed to die in the car chase or beer-glug, to kill and be killed. Denied the backdoor we stride in the front. First the hazards of mind, then our trash in the sky, fouling their paradise. One day they will beg for the rest of our offer, be glad to have our ships back. These people will glow and drip in our fires after all, die with us.
They were there falling; And they fell. And their habitat Left them. And they fell. And what they remembered was  Dismembered. But they fell. And now they dispel Those wonders that posterity constructs, By such a mystery as time obstructs; And all the missions and votaries And old maids with their chronic coteries Dispense in the old, old lorgnette views What should have kept them straight in pews. But doesn't confuse These Indians, who scan more news On the hind end of their flocks each day Than all these tourists bring their way.
It has been written in your star That fire shall kindle where you are: That where you walk there shall be strife; Ice melting; earth turned; sleep stirred; life. You will graze hearts and blood will spurt, You will be hurt because you hurt Those whom you try not even to touch, Whose eyes pursue your eyes too much. You will bring peace but oftener still Wars in your name against your will; Yet you divider, waker of Angers will suffer too much love. And you will stir the whirlpool up, And you will drink the unasked for cup, And be of those much damned and blessed Who never rest, who never rest.
What can the water be, other than itself? thought it was a fate gathered from the hills, From each grey cranny, each hollow of moist air, To glisten on your shoulders, your narrow chest; And I imagined how you would turn in sleep In the dark barn as the dream took hold of you, Its weight and plenty bearing your body down  A wish disguised, a knowledge not to be kept. The land took everything that was there to take. What remained was what was unpossessible: Servitude's counterpart, a hidden freedom Ghosting your gestures, bringing you to the pool To learn its own existence over again  Your weightless body finding in the water A different poise, the water as it clothed you Startled alive to its cold buoyant plenty.
Old trees  How exquisite the white blossom On the gnarled branch! Thickened trunk, erratic shape Battered by winter winds, Bent in the long cold. Young ones may please The aesthete, But old trees  The miracle of their flowering Against such odds  Bring healing. Let us praise them, And sing hosannahs As the small buds grow red Just before they open.
A thin, foul scattering of grim, grey snow, Reaching out scrawny limbs, deep digs its nails Into the bleeding face of suppliant earth, And grins with all its broken, yellow teeth. A warm, serene, soft heaven gazes down With dreamy eyes upon the fiend-cramped world. The rosy eastern glow, the sun's I Come, Patters about the sky, and coos, and smiles  Sweet babe with tender, rose-begetting feet. From a black corpse of tree, the hideous rasp Of staring grackles, clucking and bowing each In drivelling salute, splits the soft air To inharmonious fragments; everywhere A nervous, endless, hoarse, incessant chirp Of sparrows telling all the evil news. Ah, God for the flower-air of Spring!To see The world in bud!To press with eager feet The dear, soft, thrilling green again!To be Once more in touch with heaven upon earth! One soul-toned thrush's perfect harmony, One little warbler's huge felicity, One buttercup!One perfect butterfly!
Though my little daughter owns an Ideal farmyard let me not direct her attention to the bloody auction block, the rented backhoe reversing the plow on the earth, the iron of the farmer's hand dropped on nothingness. I know that pain has its tradition, the slaughtering blade, the black blood pounded into the grain. The dreaming animals that come to drink at this trough understand no tradition, but I can make the cattle speak as mildly as they have ever spoken, the night moths appear as harmless messengers. The woman who is standing over there under the tree near the fenceposts, touching the carved initials  she is harder to invent. In a fairy tale, she would be the familiar, privileged trespasser: she might even be what she is, a former owner on disputed land. See her eyes repossess the well, the porch, the propped-up Ford? A man in love with speed used to drive it, its tailpipe a red comet down the lonely roads. My daughter wants to know who she is, how does she fit in the picture, the green painted pasture? Everyone thinks they can make her put down the rags and the can of kerosene, maybe the dear little local paper will crown her queen of the burning trees, the dynamited dam. It's written in her two-word tattoo what she will do and it's written to you on such a bright night, moon on the fenceposts, the cow lowing softly, the ideal sky split open suddenly with stars.
where doctrine against doctrine the noysome poets babble as if their anger mounting might stand for one tower of poetry. Let them fall away! My heart despairs. For the poem beyond all poetry I have actually heard has words as natural and expendable as a cold stream of the first water thru which rocks of my resistant life yield to the light cleavages of what seems true, white heights and green deeps. Now let me describe the agony, the upward toppling from was it a simple feeling? into stylistic conglomerations of power, the devouring giant race that mistakes us opening certain likeliness so that the gods that had faces of being fell apart into one thought
The lists of endangered species grow: if our love faces extinction then growth maligns itself &amp; a word means one thing while symbol- ising another. Or maybe we are in the early evolutionary stages &amp; this our body is but a step in the right direction, this poem the missing link. In the ambiguity all passes before we want to realise that an attempt to save is ludicrous while destroying the habitat. In Dryandra forest numbats scratch out a living. We assume they are as conscious of their bodies as we are of ours though can be fairly certain that they are unaware of how vulnerable they are to outside influence. Their lifespans so short. Instinct an unreliable if determined partner. This is why poetry is a substitute for love &amp; not vice versa. This is why the red data is the proof copy for an anthology of vanquished species.
Cujus pulchritudinem Sol et luna mirantur ... Hear with what joy this child of God Plays in the perfect garden of her martyrdom, Ipsi soli servo fidem. Spending the silver of her little life To bring her Bridegroom these bright flowers Of which her arms are full. Cujus pulchritudinem ... With what white smiles She buys the Popes their palliums, And lavishes upon our souls the lambs of her confession! Sol et luna mirantur, Ipsi soli servo fidem. Her virtues, with their simple strings, Play to the Lover hidden in the universe, Cujus pulchritudinem ... Who smiles into the sun His looking-glass, And fills it with his glorious face: Who utters the round moon's recurring O And drowns our dusks in peace. Ipsi soli servo fidem! The Roman captain's work is done: Now he may tear his temples down  Her charity has flown to four horizons, like the swiftest doves, Where all towns sing like springtime, with their newborn bells Pouring her golden name out of their crucibles.
<> With hair of brass or brown Has watched my eyelids smother The truant heartbeats down. And I, who love you over The love of god or elf, Whose mind has been a rover That fled to find itself In Stephen's sturdy daring, In Philip's fair disdain, And all who would be sharing The strangeness and the pain, Loved only you in Stephen, And kissed your mouth in Giles, And found in Philip even Prediction of your smiles; And saved myself by giving To each and all who came The bread and wine of living In my beloved's name.
<> Whose Art has kept you young through sixty years, Brimming our hearts with laughter and with tears, Holding her faith pure to the very letter: We come to you today, both man and woman, And happy little children, girl and boy,  To laurel you with all our love and joy, And crown you for the dreams your pen made human: For Orphant Annie and for Old Aunt Mary, The Raggedty Man, who never will grow older, And all the kindly folks from Griggsby's Station, Immortal throngs, with Spirk and Wunk and Faery, Who swarm behind you, peering o'er your shoulder, Sharing with you the blessings of a Nation.
i speak skimpily to you about apartments i no longer dwell in and children who chant their dis obedience in choruses. if i were young i wd stretch you with my wild words while our nights run soft with hands. but i am what i am. woman. alone amid all this noise.
That terrible white light he could not shut out And Lazarus the dead lay on his back Willing with all his death-in-life gripped mind That they should roll the thick black rock again Over the entrance; relinquish him to darkness. He could not lift his hands to stop his ears Against the noises turning like screws, and the booming &lsquo;Lazarus, come forth,&rsquo; deep in his brain; Or move his head to bury his hurt eyes In the dark comfort of his coffin corner. The burden of the air falls on his limbs; And sun and wind, like love upon the face, Burst in an agony of glory on The body through which life remorseless runs. He saw the moth against the blazing day Heard the sap coursing through the withered fig And felt the breath in every swallow's bones Fluttering about the empty cavern where He now is stranger, as the living to the dead. He sat at home with those whose faith had made Him face the world again, and face their need. But all men marvelling he only knew The Lord of light insisting that he live.
<> The stooks are gone, The fields are brown, And the early dawn Grows slowly behind Where the mountains frown, And a thin white sun Is shivering down. There isn't a leaf, Nor anything green, To aid belief That summer has been; And the puffed-up red-breast (Ball o' Grief) Hops at the window For relief. The cows are in byre, The sheep in fold; The mare and the sire Are safe from cold; The hens are sheltered, In wood and wire, And the sheep-dog snoozes Before the fire. The farmer can grin, As he rubs his hands, For his crops are in From the resting lands; And his wheat is stored In the oaken bin, And his buxom wife Makes merry within.
Queen of the Courts of Love, she sleeps; one arm  Pillowing her raven hair, as Dawn might Night, Or Day kiss Dusk; or Darkness, starry warm,  Be gathered of her sister, rosy Light. Pale from the purple of the damask cloth  One hand hangs, as a lily-bloom might, lone Above a bed of poppies; or a moth  Might softly hover by a rose full-blown. Heraldic, rich, the costly coverings  Sweep, fall'n in folds, pushed partly from her breast; As through storm-broken clouds the full moon springs,  From these one orb of her pure bosom pressed. She sleeps: and where the moteless moonbeams sink  Through blazoned panes an immaterial snow  In wide, white jets, the lion-fur seems to drink  With tawny jaws their wasted, winey glow. Light-lidded sleep and holy dreams are hers,  Untouched of feverish sorrow or of care, Soft as the wind whose fragrant breathing stirs  The moonbeam-tangled tresses of her hair.
<> There is a fringe of white above his ears; he fiddles With the cross hung on his girth, explains the riddles Propounded by God. The chapel is a quiet place; Thin pale candles burn in silence on the altar. The chapel is a hush; one gnarled old nun sleeps With folded hands; one whose mouth is young weeps Behind her beads. The valiant world is locked outside; The singing world where one may love and bear a daughter Or a blue-eyed son, where one may seek the key That fits the door of Life's inscrutability. Here is refuge from the deadly sins, from pride  <> Against the seven sins, pride, covetousness, lust  <> <> <> Here is holy refuge. Slim white candles flame  <> He is a saintly man. Why does God allow Some to be good, and some to try and pray and try And weep through night and still be sinful till they die And after that, who knows? The priest kneels slowly there To chant the litany made of the Virgin's name, &ldquo;Queen of Purity, pray for us!&rdquo; The peace of prayer Is on the old; only scarlet young mouths quiver.
Adding up his offense against her disdain He put his case: simple compensation, His suit to sustain, expenditure stated, Such and such paid out in bitter tears, shame, Forfeiture of trust, with loss of good name Consequent upon disgrace, and now this Involuntary vigil upon deaths Of fellows in misfortune of ill use Compounding the sum of favor love owed If its debt to all were to be charged  A computation devised to pass away Anxious hours awaiting his own judgment While over hill bell tolled for each accused Lover sans remorse five strokes one per head.
The old dog used to herd me through the street As if the leash were for my benefit, And when our walk was over he would sit A friendly jailer, zealous, at my feet. My children would pretend that they felt fine When I was anxious at some hurt of theirs As if they were the parents, for the tears At their predicaments were often mine. And now against the whiteness of the sheet My mother, white faced, comforts with the story of Brahms, the boy, who couldn't sleep for worry Until a chord achieved its harmony, So down the stairs he crept to play the C. She means her death will make a circle complete.
White-sided flowers are thrusting up on the hillside, blank love letters from the dead. It's autumn, and nobody seems to mind. Or the broken shadows of those missing for hundreds of years Moving over the sugar cane like storks, which nobody marks or mends. This is the story line. And the viridescent shirtwaists of light the trees wear. And the sutra-circles of cattle egrets wheeling out past the rain showers. And the spiked marimbas of dawn rattling their amulets ... Soon it will be time for the long walk under the earth toward the sea. And time to retrieve the yellow sunsuit and little shoes they took my picture in In Knoxville, in 1938. Time to gather the fire in its quartz bowl. I hope the one with the white wings will come. I hope the island of reeds is as far away as I think it is. When I get there, I hope they forgive me if the knot I tie is the wrong knot.
They want it right now, do the serious drinkers. The thirty-year men with no surnames Go straight to the throat of the matter For urgent interior drenching and burning To keep the toxicity up to the mark, Scum rimming the bath of the body. They used to be somewhere quite different, At sea or in jail or pretending to settle On spartan estates and be married. They've no sense of humour about it, No photographs either. One day at a time, They imply, looking round from the bar As if something tremendous they've always been offered Turns out to be merely the carpet unzipping To vomit its cellar of demons. No matter. There's more where that came from, A holdall of shirts and the racing on loud, The face slapped with alcohol, mouthwash Reminding the tongue what it wants. Mirror-balls, mirror-tiles. Where it is brittle And carpets are crusty, in submarine discos Now boasting a brand new selection of towels to tread on And doorbolts designed to rip sleeves and break nails, The walls good for slumping, no paper, They find themselves seated in violent laughter With likeminded women girls until looked at, Whose heels keep on breaking, who cannot stop Screeching or crying or finding themselves being hit For misplaced and forgotten adventures With other such mateys because it was Christmas Or someone had won the St Leger. Their lordships Keep grazing their cheeks with their watches While wiping the sweat from their pleasure. Their voices belong with the shit-stained ceramics And doors riven off. They deliver uncatchable Howls from the corridor, make styluses jump Like a warning to someone not there Who might suddenly turn into you. They are seen in the parched red interiors Long after closing, their hands up the skirts Of unconscious companions, unconscious themselves With their mouths still at work, wanting more. They are ready for anywhere tiled and awash To abrade and contuse in, for rooms where the furniture Goes to be smashed or to burst into flame, And their kids have been lied to and stolen In some other city they will not go into, For reasons that never were your bastard business.
Athlete, virtuoso, Training for happiness, Bend arm and knee, and seek The body's sharp distress, For pain is pleasure's cost, Denial is the route To speech before the millions Or personal with the flute. The ape and great Achilles, Heavy with their fate, Batter doors down, strike Small children at the gate, Driven by love to this, As knock-kneed Hegel said, To seek with a sword their peace, That the child may be taken away From the hurly-burly and fed. Ladies and Gentlemen, said The curious Socrates, I have asked, What is this life But a childermass, As Abraham recognized, A working with the knife At animal, maid and stone Until we have cut down All but the soul alone: Through hate we guard our love, And its distinction's known.
warped this perhapsy stumbl i NgflounderpirouettiN g :seized( tatterdemalion dow nupfloatsw oon InG s ly)tuck.s its(ghostsoul sheshape) elf into leasting forever most magical maybes of certainly never the iswas teetertiptotterish sp- inwhirlpin -wh EEling ;a!who, ( whic hbubble ssomethin gabou tlov e)
<> And let him move the world. Heave it up from its solid base And trundle it off down the streets of space Like an urchin with his hoop Trot-ting trun-dling along behind (The dotard and his schoolboy mind!) If it falls he can hardly stoop To start it up again ... still Let him trundle it on through space At his steady lumbering beevish pace With sandals loosely flapping on The fundamental carapace (Bang flap bang flap bang flap bang flop).
The cows stood in a thundercloud of flies,  As lagging through the field with trailing feet I kicked up scores of skipper butterflies  That hopped a little way, lazy with heat. The wood I found was in deep shelter sunk,  Though bryony leaves shone with a glossy sweat And creeping over ground and up tree-trunk  The ivy in the sun gleamed bright and wet. Songs brief as Chinese poems the birds sung  And insects of all sheens, blue, brown and yellow, Darted and twisted in their flight and hung  On air that groaned like hoarse sweet violoncello. No leaf stirred in the wood-discouraged wind,  But foliage hung on trees like heavy wigs; The sun, come from the sky, was close behind  The fire-fringed leaves and in among the twigs.
The things they left unsaid  Were less than air: Shifts of an autumn sun  From here to there. There was the fire's low rush,  That daring sibilance. Its beads of steady light  In the near distance Drew all their secrets in,  Each turn and glance  Such hunger to consume  Irrelevance. As if the endless hour  Of memories, names, Was building a new dark  From the old flames, Feeding the chimney-stack,  Whose sooty love Posted what they had kept  To things above: Just a cold fold of tiles,  Sugared by rain, The spaces between the stars  Clouded again.
By the shot tower near the chimneys,  Off the road to Waterloo, Stands the cottage of &ldquo;The Ag&eacute;d&rdquo;  As in eighteen-forty-two. Over brickwork, brownish brickwork,  Lilac hangs in London sun And by light fantastic clockwork  Moves the drawbridge, sounds the gun. When the sunset in the side streets  Brought the breezes up the tide, Floated bits of daily journals,  Stable smells and silverside. And the gaslight, yellow gaslight,  Flaring in its wiry cage, Like the Prison Scene in   On the old Olympic stage, Lit the archway as the thunder,  And the rumble and the roll, Heralded a little handcart,  And &ldquo;The Ag&eacute;d&rdquo; selling coal.
Kerner need not resurrect his commission. The verdict is a recurring theme. I wonder if Dred Scott left behind letters. I wonder if there are Plessy vs. Ferguson interviews somewhere. I wonder if Howard has Sterling Brown's banjo So I can play his echo. The niggers did it a gain. I wonder if Dred Scott left behind letters. The verdict is a recurring theme. I wonder if there are Plessy vs. Ferguson interviews somewhere. The niggers did it a gain. The niggers in their heads. Let Kerner take his rest. The verdict is a recurring theme. The niggers did it a gain. The niggers in their heads. I wonder if Howard has Sterling Brown's banjo. So I can play his echo: ain't no need, baby. Ain't no need, baby. The niggers did it a gain. Ain't no need, baby, to be tole. The niggers in their heads.
A quavering cry. Screech-owl? Or one of them? The old man in his reek and gauntness laughs  One of them, I bet  and turns out the kitchen lamp, limping to the porch to listen in the windowless night. Be there with Boy and the rest if I was well again. Time was. Time was. White robes like moonlight In the sweetgum dark. Unbucked that one then and him squealing bloody Jesus as we cut it off. Time was. A cry? A cry all right. He hawks and spits, fevered as by groinfire. Have us a bottle, Boy and me  he's earned him a bottle  when he gets home. Then we beat them, he said, beat them till our arms was tired and the big old chains messy and red. O Jesus burning on the lily cross Christ, it was better than hunting bear which don't know why you want him dead. 0 night, rawhead and bloodybones night You kids fetch Paw some water now so's he can wash that blood off him, she said. 0 night betrayed by darkness not its own
When from the west of darkling Luss  I saw one glaring swan Ride through the arches of the mist  And, like a death, glide on: Then rain assailed the evening, and  The water twittered, like A hundred thousand crowsfeet on  The surface of the lake. The little church against the hill  With a twisted tree beside it  On six bright strokes that spellbound world  Like a dead sea divided. Three islets in looped chains of cloud  Hung, and the moon slowly Lifted her huge breast to the lake  And made the water holy. A solitary swinging bird  Stirred by the six stroke bell Cried once above the lake, and then  Again the silence fell. O darkling valley of the Usk  There I would wish to be With the wild swan glimmering in the dusk  As though to haunt me. O darkling valley of the Usk  Those kingfisher days are gone And only derelict echoes hiss  The whisper of the swan. O darkling valley of the Usk  Whenever the rain descends Will your dimmed waters mirror less  The faces of my friends? O darkling valley of the Usk  What bright shadows remain To wander by those banks where we  Will never walk again? Then from the west of darkling Usk  I saw the glaring swan Ride through the arches of the mist  And, like a death, glide on.
<> <> and clear skin (the passions trained and cultivated, tropical flowers opening under artificial light to decorate the fashionably bare interior of the borrowed soul) walking into the periphery of sight, a Puerto Rican boy in a green suede jacket with PERVERT stitched on the chest.  <> he goes to bed with me, then I'll feel other things.) So this is camp, living out lines in a poem I read long ago, living lyrics this season's diva sings on the headphones of my roommate's Walkman (the authenticity of recorded sound, with the hiss of reproduction underneath). I'm lip-synching inconspicuously enough, I hope, that no one overhears and laughs.  <> the post office would close before I mailed this to you), stuttered remix echoing hesitations of the spangled moment I make mine ( <> it means), prompting them, while fluorescent light pours down like clear water on a summer afternoon ( that summer, play), while late December snow speckles dirty windows (spangles them, even) with the beginning of a long Chicago winter. (Nothing but music to see me through, and seeing you alone or in a crowd, a glimpse out of the corner of my eye.) Every song has a story, if I have to write one, and here goes. PLEASURE, it says in turquoise letters on your black baseball cap, like this song I'm rewinding to hear again: beauty standing in line at the post office to change his address (another native of the given body, always on the move). I mail my package (a tape I copied for someone) and move on  <> walks into a crowded room again to wait his turn.
The sea's a featureless blaze. On photographs nothing comes out but glare, with that scarlet-rimmed fishing boat far-off, lost to the lens. At noon a stiff-legged tourist in shorts steps, camera poised. He's stilted as a flamingo, pink-limbed. Icons of Malta gather around him. He sweats as a procession passes and women with church-dark faces brush him as if he were air. He holds a white crocheted dress to give to his twelve-year-old daughter who moons in the apartment, sun-sore. The sky's tight as a drum, hard to breathe in, hard to walk under. He would not buy &lsquo;bikini for daughter&rsquo; though the man pressed him, with plump fingers spreading out scraps of blue cotton. Let her stay young, let her know nothing. Let her body remain skimpy and sudden. His wife builds arches of silence over her new breasts and packets of tampons marked &lsquo;slender&rsquo;. At nights, when they think she's asleep, they ache in the same places but never louder than in a whisper. He watches more women melt into a porch. Their white, still laundry flags from window to window while they are absent, their balconies blank. At six o'clock, when he comes home and snicks his key in the lock so softly neither will catch it he hears one of them laugh. They are secret in the kitchen, talking of nothing, strangers whom anyone might love.
Two silver coins in penny-farthing scale: &lsquo;Half a crown, and sixpence for the man.&rsquo; Leon Molin: front, a chemist's shop. The room beyond seemed subterranean: Oblique light from a garden, fishtank green. The sharp, specific foreignness of things: Floor-standing ashtrays, chromium-plated shrubs With hungry bulbous roots; bright flasks of &lsquo;spray&rsquo;; Loose stacks of  A hatstand with more coats than customers. Waiting my turn, I'd try to calculate Which one I'd get: the white-haired on the left, A kindly grandfather I'd never known, Or the smart schoolmasterly bully on the right, Glancing at me archly: &lsquo;Next, young man!&rsquo; At home, my father sometimes washed my hair In glutinous amber shampoo: &lsquo;Soup!&rsquo; he'd call, As my dripping scalp emerged from its solution Of Nucta Oil, brand from the gullible past, Like Kolynos toothpaste, verdant chlorophyl  Obtainable, no doubt, from Leon Molin. Yet I'll retain my vexed embarrassment At one shy boy's charade of confidence, And two old barbers, threatening and mild, Meekly accepting pennies from a child.
Here It is: squamous, hooded, Cold, slid from the mineral sleep Of rock, of metal, come a long dream Up the terrified trail of the warm-blooded. The killing god is also a dancer. Is there nothing human under the sun But ourselves? We stare at one another; Why is evil our ancient answer? And we are ancient, heads cocked, every Back hair needled up, one Vulnerable heel hung in the air, And the woods stiffened; a step away The Other, what seemed a dead stick, Lifted before our mammal eyes, And we make, as it writhes toward us, silent As God, this charm of minor music.
The green world, figuring it out,  Renewed, Arcadian, How could these couples ever doubt In snowfall, hail or waterspout  That Spring would come again? For Aucassin, for Nicolette,  For Darby and for Joan: The sunlight sharpening the wet, The Gamut, Octave, Alphabet,  The softening of stone. Obedient to natural law  The folded lovers lie, Their senses quickened to explore A Masque of Brightness played before  Conspiring hand and eye: The cuckoo's double-fluted trick,  The lanterns in the grass, The colours of May's rhetoric, And, fire from Winter's musty wick,  A chestnut Candlemas For Flora, ribboning the scene,  Enskied in white and blue, Who reconciles each might-have-been With was, to come, and in-between  To make it new, and true.
Oh what wealth of stucco flowers Will save your memory for two hours When those dishonest faces fade That bloom until the gangster's dead? Where will you find an iron wreath Appropriate to such a death? The simple grapefruit in the grove Shine like the face of childish love And sunflowers lean toward the south With the confidence of early youth. But oh, the red hibiscus paints This garden with the blood of saints, And a copper apple in the foliage Is the fine fruit of the tree of knowledge. Never did the drunkard think To taste such bitterness in his drink And there the gentle murderer stands, And sadly, sadly wipes his hands: There the forger and the thief And the bank robber bow in grief While up and down the perjurer goes, Picking his nose, picking his nose. The weary thief, the limping whore Lie down upon the windy shore: They'll find no place to rest their heads Until they're dead, until they're dead. Yet jungles full of golden bells, (The lemon groves) will ring their knells While all the downcast palms recall The tears that Magdalen let fall. So from these nameless mounds infer Some derelict, some passenger, Some gentle creature buried there, For all the downcast palms recall The tears that Magdalen let fall.
Gay chalks and a blackboard. Watch Kate trace Four fish. They hover softly in dark space, Warming the kitchen by their tranquil glow, Infallible, heraldic. Pictures flow With casual extravagance, to live Assured as flowers, and as fugitive. These lack all claim or pretext; merely say: Here is a world, and it behaves this way. They mock our making by their candour; lift Our hesitant, blunt senses; are true gift For Rilke's Angels. Knowing our task is To feed the invisible with our images, We rub the blackboard clear: four fish allow To swim in darker space more subtly now.
I gave myself prosperity, Remarking in the pause of dreams Summer blossoms on a tree  Red and red against the green Which fixed the mood of might-have-been. On bleeding streets lucidity Fixed the tone of is and seems  Summer blossoms on a tree  Directing by the green and red A fluent traffic in the head. Remarking love and charity  Summer blossoms on a tree  I gave myself the pause of seems, Between the is of red and green The memory of had-not-been. Summer blossoms on a tree I gave myself prosperity  Charity, lucidity  Remarking in the mood of seems The doom of all my traffic dreams.
&ldquo; 'Seemeth thou art too fair, too beautiful, My little sister! Now the gusts blow free Thy loose robes, and I think thou art too fair, Too fair, too sadly fair. Each balanced line Sweeps in a modulated symmetry, Each thin fold of thy dress, each sculptured limb  But O what sculpture hath the dangerous fire And fervor! 'Seemeth men crowd round and blood Heats for thy touch, and thy fair face so cool And warm and glorious. 'Seemeth strong men rise, Made passionate and noble, and despairing And treacherous yea! these things, these shall be In multitudinous men! And 'seemeth towers Burn like brave beacons red against the sea. And thou dost weep, and thou dost then forget The little laughing things thou say'st to me. And thou dost sudden grow noble and sudden grow Haughty and far and full of proud desires That none may know and live. And thou dost stand Later, the withering South Wind in thy hair Still bright with one bright poppy, and dost see Paris lurch down, and lustful Menelaus Reclaim thee with a leer; and thou dost turn To him, and all the shrivelling years grow blank, And thou dost pale beside him, and dost forget The sunlight on our faces, and these flags Rippled by the gusts as we walk hand in hand Today, my little sister, ere the world Drags in upon us. And then thou dost die, Unmindful of thy beauty, and these things, Unmindful of thy life and love and me.... &ldquo;... O Helen, Helen, Helen! thou'rt too fair, Walking beside the lake with me today. Beauty is God, the poets sing. I sing That too much beauty, too much God is death. And death is pain, and soul-obliteration. Pity is me! Thou'rt beautiful, and I Who walk beside, foreknow the ruining hand; Foreknow that thou and earth and god are death! And death is earth and thee, O Helen, Helen!&rdquo;
Turned from the &ldquo;eau-forte Par Jacquemart&rdquo; To the strait head Of Messalina: &ldquo;His true Penelope Was Flaubert,&rdquo; And his tool The engraver's. Firmness, Not the full smile, His art, but an art In profile; Colourless Pier Francesca, Pisanello lacking the skill To forge Achaia.
Some foreign freighter crawls a blue path north to Juan de Fuca and we let it go. We didn't used to. All who entered here, this passage between Marrowstone and Whidbey, were invaders and we made them pay. We pointed these black cannons at them and we shouted &lsquo;boom&rsquo; and they came coughing foam, hands high in surrender. That was forty years ago, the real war still to come. We believed citations, the distinguished cross of heron over smelt, adoring women, the deep meaning of taps across the water sad on a minus tide, flag at half mast and roses floating where the hero took his green chill place among the ratfish. Three wars later, one win, one tie, one loss, the guns never fired hang limp in their mounts. Any war could be called off because of weather. Rain's not good for ammo and one glint of sun deflects confident rounds off target. The alert goes out: salmon in the camp! and candlefish close ranks. Danger below the surface it is wise to know how silly we look in uniform saluting the ship that passes too far out to tell us where it's from, has no interest beyond instrument readings and charts that help it through the straight, then help it cross the blank enormous water, the only check point music from the port picked up days out.
Near the campus, every night, there was a ceremony familiar and savored as piragua, fruit syrup on ice: First, the student strike, congregating on the plaza with songs taunting the governor and the chancellor in rhyme, five beats of the clave, placards accusing collaboration with bankers and the Marines. Then, every night, the canter of the police, rumbling on cobblestone through the plaza in the wake of dropped leaflets, clubs sweeping at heads like cop fantasies of Roberto Clemente at bat, though his spirit spat back the water that drowned him in shame. Everyone had a spell for disappearing, a secret for dissolving between the grillwork of balconies and fire escapes, down hallways with a single dead bulb, basement steps. The plaza was an empty postcard. Later, after the flashlights and battery-charged eyes of the cops had dimmed, they crept back onto the plaza, calling to each other with the wooden clap of the claves and hands slapping time till the beat bounced off cobblestone, feasting on rebel songs cool on the tongue as fruit syrup and ice, multiplying in the dark like cockroaches of liberation too quick for stomping boots that circle back on the hour, immune to the stink of government fumigation.
<>  The sea-mists swoon: Wind-twisted pines, through which the crow  Goes winging slow: Dim fields, the sower never sows,  Or reaps or mows: And near the sea a ghostly house of stone  Where all is old and lone. A garden, falling in decay,  Where statues gray Peer, broken, out of tangled weed  And thorny seed: Satyr and Nymph, that once made love  By walk and grove: And, near a fountain, shattered, green with mold,  A sundial, lichen-old. Like some sad life bereft,  To musing left, The house stands: love and youth  Both gone, in sooth: But still it sits and dreams:  And round it seems Some memory of the past, still young and fair,  Haunting each crumbling stair. And suddenly one dimly sees,  Come through the trees, A woman, like a wild moss-rose:  A man, who goes Softly: and by the dial  They kiss a while: Then drowsily the mists blow round them, wan,  And they, like ghosts, are gone.
If suddenly you walk on grass turned stone and think its marble handsomer than green, or see at play a nymph and faun that seem happier in bronze than in any dream, let your walking stick fall from your weary hand, you're in The Empire, friend. Air, fire, water, fauns, naiads, lions drawn from nature, or bodied in imagination, everything God ventured and reason grew bored nourishing have in stone and metal been restored. This is the end of things. This is, at the road's end, a mirror by which to enter. Stand in a niche, roll your eyes up, and watch the ages vanish round the bend, and watch how moss develops in the statue's groin, how dust rains on the shoulders that tan of time. Someone breaks an arm off, and the head from the shoulders falls with the thud of boulders. The torso left is a nameless sum of muscle. In a thousand years a mouse, living in a hole, with a claw broken off from trying to eke a life out of granite, will scurry with a squeak across the road one night and not come back to its burrow at midnight tonight. Or at daybreak tomorrow.
I seemed to see you some Sebastian Tortured with arrows, but the gathering crowd Admired your trappings most and saw no blood Clapping their hands and crying Laugh, fool, laugh. And like a puppet on a jerky string You flopped and strutted bowing to applause. Then when you tried as formerly to bend And lift with flabby hand the grotesque mask They pulled you from the wings, they set you down &lsquo;To be yourself&rsquo; again and do your stunt And shrieked with laughter while you grimaced there Dependent on their need as on your cord. And so although you said you hated it You would not leave and burn in the Green room The tinsel that supplied your livelihood Because without it you would feel a cold Bitterer far than lack of money brought. Your eye no longer looks for exit doors: Years of fame and favour call ahead, Mask and strings have done what no arrow could.
Heavy, heavy the summer and its gloom, The place, a place of learning, the difficult strange place, And for what reason and from how far did you come, To find the desolation and the thin soil, To find the great heat and the sudden rain, To listen for the long cry of the through train? The time, a time of teaching, a curious time. The birds alone made welcome in the morning sun And all else strange. But this familiar, this well known, This, in a sense, always the world where one moves Opening the doors, opening the doors to push through alone, And it is a way of many isolated deepening loves. This we have known. It has been like this before. The place of learning. The fear and trembling. The final opening of a door. But here in the place of learning, in the time of teaching, To find also, and surely not by accident, Among the gifts of trees, of birds, the various gifts: Coolness after long heat, a lightening sky after Much heaviness, also to find  The open heart, detached and open, So feeling it has become impersonal as sunlight, To find this curious one, creative and aloof: From how far and for what reason did you come, Stranger with a fire in your head, to this deep kind of welcome? So what you gave was given and what you taught was learned, Striking rock for water and the water falling from air, Opening a door to find someone in the room, already there.
a flyfree sometime on the window a man looking out wind and sky, grain a woman mends socks,space closed offgradation days shifting enough at some pointhills rolling brilliant white cloud a gate swinging back farther to let live | After the film <> <> Czech), some of it |
Head to limp head, the sunk-eyed wounded scanned Yesterday's  And (large) Vast Booty from our Latest Haul. Also, they read of Cheap Homes, not yet planned, &lsquo;For', said the paper, &lsquo;when this war is done The men's first instincts will be making homes. Meanwhile their foremost need is aerodromes, It being certain war has but begun. Peace would do wrong to our undying dead,   The sons we offered might regret they died If we got nothing lasting in their stead. We must be solidly indemnified. Though all be worthy Victory which all bought, We rulers sitting in this ancient spot Would wrong our very selves if we forgot The greatest glory will be theirs who fought, Who kept this nation in integrity.' Nation? The half-limbed readers did not chafe But smiled at one another curiously Like secret men who know their secret safe. (This is the thing they know and never speak, That England one by one had fled to France, Not many elsewhere now, save under France.) Pictures of these broad smiles appear each week, And people in whose voice real feeling rings Say: How they smile! They're happy now, poor things.
Not, to me, less lavish though my dreams have been splendid  Than dreams, have been the hours of the actual day: Never, awaking, did I awake to say: &ldquo;Nothing could be like that,&rdquo; when a dream was ended. Colours, in dream; ecstasy, in dream extended Beyond the edge of sleep these, in their way, Approach, come even close, yet pause, yet stay, In the high presence of request by its answer attended. Music, and painting, poetry, love, and grief, Had they been more intense, I could not have borne,  Yet, not, I think, through stout endurance lacked; Rather, because the budding and the falling leaf Were one, and wonderful, not to be torn Apart: I ask of dream: seem like the fact.
Afar from our lawn and our lev&eacute;e,  O sister of sorrowful gaze! Where the roses in scarlet are heavy  And dream of the end of their days, You move in another dominion  And hang o'er the historied stone: Unpruned is your beautiful pinion  Who wander and whisper alone. Come away while the moon's in the woodland,  We'll dance and then feast in a dairy. Though youngest of all in our good band,  You are wasting away, little fairy. Ah! cruel ones, leave me alone now  While I murmur a little and ponder The history here in the stone now;  Then away and away will I wander, And measure the minds of the flowers,  And gaze on the meadow-mice wary, And number their days and their hours  You are wasting away, little fairy. O shining ones, lightly with song pass,  Ah! leave me, I pray you and beg. My mother drew forth from the long grass  A piece of a nightingale's egg, And cradled me here where are sung,  Of birds even, longings for aery Wild wisdoms of spirit and tongue. You are wasting away, little fairy. Though tenderest roses were round you,  The soul of the pitiless place With pitiless magic has bound you   Ah! woe for the loss of your face, And loss of your laugh and its lightness   Ah! woe for your wings and your head  Ah! woe for your eyes and their brightness   Ah! woe for your slippers of red. Come away while the moon's in the woodland,  We'll dance and then feast in a dairy. Though youngest of all in our good band,  She is wasting away, little fairy.
Lord, You may not recognize me speaking for someone else. I have a son. He is so little, so ignorant. He likes to stand at the screen door, calling <> language, and sometimes a dog will stop and come up the walk, perhaps accidentally. May he believe this is not an accident? At the screen welcoming each beast in love's name, Your emissary.
My brother who knows the indignity of work rides home with the taste of it turning peptic, that odor of swallowed pride rising into his breath, his wife waiting for the kiss that's so full of the day she can't bear it. My brother who hears the shout of bosses, who is no boss himself, only shouts at home, thinks shouting is what permits the bosses to move with the easy self- fulfilled gait of leopards who've eaten all they've killed. My brother who will not leave his job wonders how Gauguin left the world and found himself on the other side of it. &ldquo;What  than a suicide.&rdquo; My brother who is no less than anyone circumstance has made to do its bidding, who wants to rise one morning against all odds and slip into his leopard body, my brother is coming home now and his wife is waiting for the kiss.
&lsquo;This is a dream,&rsquo; I tell myself, waking, &lsquo;And what it says isn't real.&rsquo; But there's my house, Its stairs and its ramshackle rooms overflowing With people from the street, and that blonde girl you knew. I've really no idea what they're all doing there, This whole vacant parade of the unwanted world. Now we've found our own space, so I no longer care: Released from your wrapping, you are my present. Yet what subtle adjustments we've made since we began To know each other last winter: I've even grown to love Those dead flattened vowels you claim as Australian. Holding you now, I could tear you apart like bread. My head on your musky chest, I must have slept, Waking to find the house still crowded, its furniture Dispersed and rearranged, all out of place except You, warm in weak sunlight on your nest of denim. I cautiously explore: a pine table from the kitchen Is wedged into the study, whose papers and books Are strewn in the bathroom, my history rewritten By strangers who view me with unconcerned reserve. And here's the blonde girl, perched on the landing, Leaning on a sideboard I've never seen before. &lsquo;I told you he wasn't like that,&rsquo; she says, smiling. &lsquo;Oh, but&rsquo; I'm smiling too &lsquo;he is. He is.&rsquo;
The thousand people stand in the sunlight, They are taking in the messages of the speakers Deliberately, they are weighing the judgments, They are making up their minds. The sun is on their shoulders, weight of the earth, They know it, and they are not despairing. Against odds, they may consider quietly and freely What they will do. Who knows then, not I, And I am desperate in no knowledge, If later, somewhat dispersed, they will yell And turn and burn the place where they stood. But look, the May light Outlines each shape, each moving Out from the crowd, each carrying In his own mind the place where he stood.
The air is white and dense where fishermen dip their hooks into black silence, and it's hard to believe in islands half a mile away in the mist, the delicate archipelago of the map. Six posts step out to sea, ice-locked where water laps in summer, and boats waltz on their slack ropes. Salt-smells, fish, bird-cries locked in the sea's cellar, the land under wraps. You can drive to Sweden, they tell me, or catch the post for Stockholm half way over. Trying to believe it, I walk on the sea, out between the posts until I'm lost in whiteness, wondering, without a bird's talent for magnetism, how I'll know the way.
In the burlesque fantasy of Seneca They produce from a little box The spindles of Claudius and his Similarly ill-fated cronies. Tapes of their greatest hits. The ancients laughed themselves to death. Earlier, weird tales Tell of strange, difficult women Living on tv dinners in some Bat cave in the Arcadian Ozarks. We see them fiddling in the mist With armfuls of tapes and spools. These twisted, twisting Sisters gene-splicing The species into the ground, Word-processing the future Into concrete these twisted, Twisting sisters, doing death's work In the bullshit of the myth  Being right is their only excuse.
&ldquo;Life,&rdquo; said Joe Butensky, &ldquo;is like a glass of tea.&rdquo; If you asked him why, &ldquo;How do I know?&rdquo; he would say. &ldquo;Am I a philosopher?&rdquo; I was reminded of Joe the other day on the subway. Sitting across from me was a woman wearing a jacket with the 82nd Airborne patch, pants of glistening spandex, and running shoes. Two wires hung from her head to the stereo she was holding in her lap. I thought of Joe. Don't ask me why. Am I a philosopher?
I met a ragged man; He looked beyond me when I tried to meet his eyes. What have I done to you? I cried, and backed away. Dust in a corner stirred, And the walls stretched wide. I went running down a road, In a country of bleak stone, And shocks of ragged corn; When I stayed for breath, I lay With the saxifrage and fern At the edge of a raw field. I stared at a fissure of ground Ringed round with crumbled clay: The old house of a crab; Stared, and began to sing. I sang to whatever had been Down in that watery hole: I wooed with a low tune; You could say I was mad. And a wind woke in my hair, And the sweat poured from my face, When I heard, or thought I heard, Another join my song With the small voice of a child, Close, and yet far away. Mouth upon mouth, we sang, My lips pressed upon stone.
All my girlfriends were talking about sex and the vibrators they ordered from Eve's Garden which came with genital portraits of twelve different girls. All my friends' needs swirled around me while their conversations about positions crescendoed and they waved their vibrators black rubber things. Saved by volubility I looked at the relations of labia to clitori look, there was one like mine, labia like chicken wattles below a hooded clitoris. &ldquo;Friends! of these twelve genital portraits, which are you?&rdquo; I couldn't ask them. Happy to have found a picture of one like me: the portrait held the hair all back and popped the clitoris out like a snapdragon above the dark vaginal stem. Oh God, it was me! (And another, I stopped, there were others like us, throughout the world.) When my order for the vibrator was filled, I'd get my own portrait. I'd show it to the next boy before I got undressed: &ldquo;Here's what you're getting.&rdquo; <>
Leaning upon that chalky cliff you held your breath and wondered at strange perfection of the walls, pure circles cut by rain where moss hung like dead hair, and great green cacti straggled down the walls like spiders. The deep and stagnant water, green too, seemed to lure more than those stones two clowning toughs threw in, standing on the clay parapet the priests had left, who wore sacred feathers when they threw their best victims in. Dark was coming fast that Friday we saw it, this immense sink hole, and felt something beneath the scum wanting us, alluring where quartz skulls, onyx knives, golden women with their jewels fell and fell for sixty feet, like birds unique and special to their time as we, Dear, are not to ours. You held on tight and later said you almost jumped out past the caverns pocking walls. But tourists need not leap, I said, nor be taken in by darkness. That place of death looked exactly like what it was. You held your breath and screamed when that German threw in lizards he'd caught on pyramids.
Odd that an extra member of  should raise her head after so many years. That not even the gnostics had ventured to mention this hanger-on, malingerer who'd managed to install herself in the sacred tomb. That it was she who gathered crumbs from under the table, delivered loaves, consoled lepers as sores re-opened. That it was she who sought life in the tree withered in its failure to bear fruit, returned coins, saved fish from the nets.
It is almost always raining in their eyes when they leave the boats to form the circle. They sit on their haunches and pass the whiskey in the cold fish-packing plant until the rain turns to ice. They are old. The rain makes their bones ache. The whiskey loosens the spasms of their brittle chests. They speak of the few fish to be caught in the rain, of the ice on their hands of the sons who did not drown but were found face down in water thick with pale green plants. None notices the one who gets up when his shoulder is tapped. The circle closes; spit hisses on the pot-bellied stove. One wipes his mouth on his sleeve and speaks of sun on his forehead.
In agony saying:&ldquo;The last night of his life, My son and I in the kitchen:At half-past one He said, &lsquo;I have failed as a husband. Now my wife Is ill again and suffering.&rsquo; At two He said, &lsquo;I have failed as a farmer, for the sun Is never there, the rain is never there.&rsquo; At three he said, &lsquo;I have failed as a poet who Has never not once found my listener. There is no sense to my life.&rsquo; But then he heard me out. I argued point by point. Seemed to win. Won. He spoke to me once more when I was done: &lsquo;Even in argument, father, I have lost.&rsquo; He went and shot himself. Now tell me this one thing: Should I have let him win then? Was I wrong?&rdquo; To answer for the land for love for song Arguing life for life even at your life's cost.
Impolitic text of the past unfolding In a chain of tales whispered down dimly Lit corridors and under kitchen stairs, Quite quickly all her indiscretions Came to the bleak light of that cold killing Season, and all the old grudges aired Out a history in which love had found Her &ldquo;in arms kissing,&rdquo; and haunted her Bedchamber nightly in the entirely Credible persons of some several Alert, opportunistic young men, During long, love-making, murmuring, Bickering, promising, reproaching, Passionate English summer evenings.
I am the left-handed drinker (drunkard, you call it) who pours my own sake, though only a thimbleful. I am the Yama no Kami who lifts my eyes to my husband's  to contradict him. I am the poet who sees in the falling plum leaves all the places the wind might take them. &ldquo;It's a cold and western wind,&rdquo; you answer &ldquo;and our walls are made of rice paper.&rdquo;
<>  At the mid of moon, At end of day  My lamp is lit, Grant me a boon, I pray, And do So order it  That the small creatures, Terrified and blind: The gold and silvern moths Of lovely kind, Do not whirl to my taper, Nor, therein, Die, painfully, And bring my light To sin. My light Is innocent! Grant  That it may be Harmless, And helpful, And remarked Of Thee.
The hurricane of '54 that knocked the spire off Old North Church no damage did to me and mine for the house that Williams built and many friends drove nails houselikely sheltered us as at the streaming windows we saw bay flood the meadow dunes fly up in clouds the fishing-fleet destroyed but the elastic pines wrestle the winds and win. The storm was circular, first from the east the blow sought us out, it blasted our south as laughing sun leaked through the wild spray, for hours west wall bore it, as evening fell departed the gentle gale from the north. The barometer rose, the vortex has left the kitchen, sea-gulls are soaring from Blackfish Creek, cars are roaring to Wellfleet, the woods are pruned, the world is washed, and the townspeople will talk of nothing else forever, a bore for years to come. For young folk talk about animals but old folk like to dwell minutely on disasters.
I was tempted to the grove by its odor; the tang lingered over the whole countryside, and from the hilltop where I stood orange was the banner laid out like a signal. I had no exact notion, but of itself it seemed a goal: to be overwhelmed in its odor. I came downhill, and saw these men at work, on ladders to pick oranges; they were not tall enough; and as I watched I too was drawn in. And now as I labor, the days going by redolent  I have breathed in them too long to be curious  these oranges have failed me.
See the high birds! Is their's the song That flies among the wood-light Wounding the listener with such bright arrows? Or do they play in wheeling silences Defining in the perfect sky The bounds of (here below) our solitude, Where spring has generated lights of green To glow in clouds upon the sombre branches? Ponds full of sky and stillnesses What heavy summer songs still sleep Under the tawny rushes at your brim? More than a season will be born here, nature, In your world of gravid mirrors! The quiet air awaits one note, One light, one ray and it will be the angels' spring: One flash, one glance upon the shiny pond, and then <> For, like a grain of fire Smouldering in the heart of every living essence God plants His undivided power  Buries His thought too vast for worlds In seed and root and blade and flower, Until, in the amazing shadowlights Of windy, cloudy April, Surcharging the religious silence of the spring Creation finds the pressure of its everlasting secret Too terrible to bear. Then every way we look, lo! rocks and trees Pastures and hills and streams and birds and firmament And our own souls within us flash, and shower us with light, While the wild countryside, unknown, unvisited of men, Bears sheaves of clean, transforming fire. And then, oh then the written image, schooled in sacrifice, The deep united threeness printed in our deepest being, Shot by the brilliant syllable of such an intuition, turns within, And plants that light far down into the heart of darkness and oblivion And plunges after to discover flame.
Lately I have been thinking much of those, The open ones, the great transparencies, Through whom life is it wind or water? flows Unstinted, who have learned the sovereign ease. They are not young; they are not ever young. Youth is too vulnerable to bear the tide, And let it rise, and never hold it back, Then let it ebb, not suffering from pride, Nor thinking it must ebb from private lack. The elders yield because they are so strong  Seized by the great wind like a ripening field, All rippled over in a sensuous sweep, Wave after wave, lifted and glad to yield, But whether wind or water, never keep The tide from flowing or hold it back for long. Lately I have been thinking much of these, The unafraid although still vulnerable, Through whom life flows, the great transparencies, The old and open, brave and beautiful ... They are not young; they are not ever young.
A prey bird flies  suddenly cedilla in its grasp with carrion anonymity, thwarting pacts and boundaries as cold fronts and accrued  ordinance encrypt with rumour; the ruffled field a plough's scamming profit in scannable lines of sowing,  as legend or grand design, pinpointing a subject,  having the presence of mind, the evolutionary tact to ignore the glowing reports of order.
Plurality is all. I walk among the restaurants, the theatres, the grocery stores; I ride the cars and hear of Mrs. Bedford's teeth and Albuquerque, strikes unsettled, someone's simply marvelous date, news of the German Jews, the baseball scores, storetalk and whoretalk, talk of wars. I turn the pages of a thousand books to read the names of Buddha, Malthus, Walker Evans, Stendhal, Andr&eacute; Gide, Ouspenski; note the terms: obscurantism, factorize, fagaceous, endocarp; descend the nervous stairs to hear the broken ends of songs that float through city air. In Osnabr&uuml;ck and Ogden, on the Passamaquoddy Bay, in Ahmednagar, Waco (Neb.), in Santa F&eacute;, propelled by zeros, zinc, and zephyrs, always I'm pursued by thoughts of what I am, authority, remembrance, food, the letter on the mezzanine, the unemployed, dogs' lonely faces, pianos and decay. Plurality is all. I sympathize, but cannot grieve too long for those who wear their dialectics on their sleeves The pattern's one I sometimes rather like; there's really nothing wrong with it for some. But I should add: It doesn't wear for long, before I push the elevator bell and quickly leave.
Were they cousins? Had they Before they were ever lovers Been friends as children, So long ago? While she sat and sewed Did he sing and play Such tunes as came to him From old lays of service Sung long ago? Was she the fair falcon In his epigram on luck That lying pale on the wind Brought favor to him Before he was forsaken So long ago?
Down in the engine room again Touching a silver steam line with a tiny brush. Soogy the oil sump gloves and rags   &ldquo;how long you say you been Japan? six years eh you must like the place. those guys in New York bunch of fuckin crooks. they ain't just selling little two-bit caps, they making books.&rdquo; Rinse out the soogy rag in kerosene. And wipe off sooty oil condenser line Driving forward geared turbine  The driveshaft treetrunk thick, Bearings bathed in flowing oil, The belly of the ship.
He will be given again to the indifferent world, Go south to a city, Muse over coffee in small caf&eacute;s, Take the usual room, Hear from his bed the buoy grieve in the harbor, Like a lorn bull, That moans and bellows, And though sea birds circle Will not be consoled. He will stare up the dark through the tall invisible storeys above him, Where men and women place mouth to mouth in their old exploration, And will watch through the roof the small hard and unquenchable stars Make their overhead arc; And think what a curious thing a life is, That brings and discloses, But never quite what had been expected, And never quite what one wanted to know. It keeps for itself its anterior knowledge As of no concern. So the man will stare, In the space before sleep; Or over the mug on the stained table, Where the butt in the ashtray Leaves its carmine smear on his mind; And will turn when the tapping plucks his ear, And see the blind veteran enter, Bearing his unrejectable cup; And will then understand How the gnarled event must be weighed in its world, Under the havoc-holding sky, Under the iron, Under the catapulting dead, Who grin in the metallurgic grip And eat their answer. It will ring like the guilty coin in the cup. It will be taken aside, And secretly appraised, And found insufficient. It will be tucked away with the piece of string, With the match and the nickel, In the little pocket above the groin, Where the maimed genitals, In their soiled truss, Bear the seed of an oncoming age.
To keep the one you want dig up a footprint of hers and put it in a flowerpot. Then plant a marigold, the flower that doesn't fade. And love her. If she's distant now it's for a reason beyond control. So don't tamper with the impressions left by her body when for the last time she leaves your bed. Just smooth them out and forget her. Who is not vulnerable to a stronger magic (the broken glass, the bullets in a yawn), the terrible power of the one less in love.
Earth,  Womb,  Subject to its laws of development, experience, observation and verification of salted, borrowed blood: the given name for the fetus must be  Beaker of the body's warmth: pinprick, secret ruby, transient blossom, Empirical. The womb catches life like a well harboring pennies, whatever's sent to it, the water wise but untelling. I lay on the table, my puerile dress folded on a chair. Brought with me a thesaurus, its outer covers lost. My body moored, I watched the ceiling's white, starless firmament and began my recitation out of the injured book. <> <> <> <> <> Again I was dark, green water for the copper coins to hurry down to.
When class was in the garden at Greylands And we tried to translate Euripides Not knowing Greek We cared little for a dead hero However mad Or for his mad language Prefects and cricketers We were alive &amp; sane and careless in our own strength. We spoke English. We smiled At the Master's cat. Holidays came, We left the crazy Titan Before the hot shirt Drove him to kill his own children. We were alive &amp; sane Sons of a cool &amp; gentle England. That was in 1931. Since then There have been hotter seasons We go on translating More &amp; more Euripides With less &amp; less Greek. The fury of Herakles Has swollen beyond bounds. And now we are never out of danger We have forgotten our smiles &amp; our strength
By chance I glimpsed them, mid-morning lovers upstairs, over their fence of wire net, laundry afloat in the breeze, shirt like a great plum, brassiere bereft and hangdog on the line  I sighted along an inclined plane their dark shadow centered, devotions most tender, all of an instant vivid, like birds beyond their orchard of apples. Her shuddering hip and fall of soft breast broke me, not touching my face, nothing but an old dog my companion as we both kept walking as if by command, our pace unbroken though the front yard pulsed and glowed green and the sky flashed blue with their abandon, which bid me stay, be born of their love above that backyard of laundry, backlit shirt of my father, frayed curtain whipped inward.
The world's as the world is; the nations rearm and prepare to change; the age of tyrants returns; The greatest civilization that has ever existed builds itself higher towers on breaking foundations. Recurrent episodes; they were determined when the ape's children first ran in packs, chipped flint to an edge. I lie and hear dark rain beat the roof, and the blind wind. In the morning perhaps I shall find strength again To value the immense beauty of this time of the world, the flowers of decay their pitiful loveliness, the fever-dream Tapestries that back the drama and are called the future. This ebb of vitality feels the ignoble and cruel Incidents, not the vast abstract order. I lie and hear dark rain beat the roof, and the night-blind wind. In the Ventana country darkness and rain and the roar of waters fill the deep mountain-throats. The creekside shelf of sand where we lay last August under a slip of stars And firelight played on the leaning gorge-walls, is drowned and lost. The deer of the country huddle on a ridge In a close herd under madrone-trees; they tremble when a rock-slide goes down, they open great darkness- Drinking eyes and press closer. Cataracts of rock Rain down the mountain from cliff to cliff and torment the stream-bed. The stream deals with them. The laurels are wounded, Redwoods go down with their earth and lie thwart the gorge. I hear the torrent boulders battering each other, I feel the flesh of the mountain move on its bones in the wet darkness. Is this more beautiful Than man's disasters? These wounds will heal in their time; so will humanity's. This is more beautiful ... at night ...
Suppose this was the root of everything. Suppose it turned out to be or that it touched An image that was mistress of the world. For example: Au Ch&acirc;teau. Un Salon. A glass The sun steps into, regards and finds itself; Or: Gawks of hay ... Augusta Moon, before An attic glass, hums of the old Lutheran bells At home; or: In the woods, belle Belle alone Rattles with fear in unreflecting leaves. Abba, dark death is the breaking of a glass. The dazzled flakes and splinters disappear. The seal is as relaxed as dirt, perdu. But the images, disembodied, are not broken. They have, or they may have, their glittering crown, Sound-soothing pearl and omni-diamond, Of the most beautiful, the most beautiful maid And mother. How long have you lived and looked, Ababba, expecting this king's queen to appear?
Within the old, old forest  The wind hath whispered me Thou dwellest thou, who warrest  With birds in melody, And all the wood-ways starrest  With wild-flow'rs fragrantly,  Thou presence none may see! If I should find thee sitting  Beneath the woodland tree, The elder-blossoms knitting  In wreaths of witchery, Between the glimpse and flitting,  What wouldst thou show to me,  Thou presence none may see? O thou, who, haply, hidest,  A flower upon the tree; Or in a color glidest,  Or murmur of a bee; Or in a scent abidest,  A fragrance, show to me  The things no man may see! If I should find thee dreaming  Upon the wild-rose lea, The heart within thee gleaming  And breathing like a bee, Between the real and seeming,  What wouldst thou say to me,  Thou presence none may see? O thou, who, haply, tellest  To birds their wildwood glee; Who in the water wellest  As murmuring melody; And in the wood-wind dwellest  As music, sing to me  Of that no man may see!
How does one stand To behold the sublime, To confront the mockers, The mickey mockers And plated pairs? When General Jackson Posed for his statue He knew how one feels. Shall a man go barefoot Blinking and blank? But how does one feel? One grows used to the weather, The landscape and that; And the sublime comes down To the spirit itself, The spirit and space, The empty spirit In vacant space. What wine does one drink? What bread does one eat?
&lsquo;Time stands still  With gazing on her face,&rsquo; Sang Dowland to his lute,  Full of courtly grace. Now that his musician's face  And her face are dust, Still I cry, Stand still;  Still cry I must. Stand still, Time;  Hold, hold your pace; Stiller stand than the smile  On Pharaoh's face. Stiller than December's frost  That takes the heart with wonder, Or the pause that comes between  Lightning and thunder. Time, stand still;  Hush now your tread, Stand, stiller than a room  Where lie the sheeted dead. Where, in the busy noon,  None comes and goes; Where the tree of endless peace  To the ceiling grows. O Time, Time,  Stark and full of pain, Why drag me into space,  A dog upon a chain? I who would float with you,  A ship sailing white, Who cannot tell which power is hers,  Or which the wind's delight. So my refresh&egrave;d soul  Time would adore, If for one moment's space  Time were no more. Now with Dowland's broken lute  And his forgotten rhyme, Still I cry, Stand still,  Stand still, Time.
That was a place, when I was young, Where two or three good friends and I Tested the fruit against the tongue Or threw the withered windfalls by. The sparrows, angry in the sky, Denounced us from a broken bough. They limp along the wind and die. The apples all are eaten now. Behind the orchard, past one hill The lean satanic owner lay And threatened us with murder till We stole his riches all away. He caught us in the act one day And damned us to the laughing bone, And fired his gun across the gray Autumn where now his life is done. Sorry for him, or any man Who lost his labored wealth to thieves, Today I mourn him, as I can, By leaving in their golden leaves Some luscious apples overhead. Now may my abstinence restore Peace to the orchard and the dead. We shall not nag them any more.
Much of transfiguration that we hear, The ballet of the atoms, the second law Of thermo-dynamics, Isis, and the queer Fertilization of fish, the Catholic's awe For the life-cycle of the Nazarene, His wife whom sleeping Milton thought he saw; Much of the resurrection that we've seen And taken part in, like the Passion Play, All of autumnal red and April green, To those who walk in work from day to day, To economic and responsible man, All, all is substance. Life that lets him stay Uses his substance kindly while she can But drops him lifeless after his one span. What lives? the proper creatures in their homes? A weed? the white and giddy butterfly? Bacteria? necklaces of chromosomes? What lives? the breathing bell of the clear sky? The crazed bull of the sea? Andean crags? Armies that plunge into themselves to die? People? A sacred relic wrapped in rags, The ham-bone of a saint, the winter rose, Do these? And is there not a hand that drags The bottom of the universe for those Who still perhaps are breathing? Listen well, There lives a quiet like a cathedral close At the soul's center where substance cannot dwell And life flowers like music from a bell. Writing, I crushed an insect with my nail And thought nothing at all. A bit of wing Caught my eye then, a gossamer so frail And exquisite, I saw in it a thing That scorned the grossness of the thing I wrote. It hung upon my finger like a sting. A leg I noticed next, fine as a mote, &ldquo;And on this frail eyelash he walked,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;And climbed and walked like any mountain-goat.&rdquo; And in this mood I sought the little head, But it was lost; then in my heart a fear Cried out, &ldquo;A life why beautiful, why dead!&rdquo; It was a mite that held itself most dear, So small I could have drowned it with a tear.
Our divinations, Mechanisms of angelic thought, The means of prophecy, Alert us most At evening's one star And its pastoral text, When the establishments Of wind and light and cloud Await an arrival, A reader of the text, A reader without a body, Who reads quietly: &ldquo;Horrid figures of Medusa, These accents explicate The sparkling fall of night On Europe, to the last Alp, And the sheeted Atlantic. These are not banlieus Lacking men of stone, In a well-rosed two-light Of their own. I am the archangel of evening and praise This one star's blaze. Suppose it was a drop of blood ... So much guilt lies buried Beneath the innocence Of autumn days.&rdquo;
<> Impinged on through the play of circumstance By outer majesties, and in the dance Of hours and life's illusory pantomime Shadowed and brooded o'er by the sublime; Blind f&oelig;ti nourished through the world of chance, Our matrix and our prison, we advance From dream to dream as all flesh since its prime. Yet we who sensed the exaltations of war Enveloped in the &AElig;schylean mood From moon to moon, who knew the immanence Of unnamed powers, are returned therefore Children of storm, an earthquake-fostered brood, Dowered within the womb of great events.
they sell meat flowers in that crazy shop across the street. it's a feast called the menacing babies of future events. music from somewhere. there is a meat flower in the piano. this sale must run intricate ways like illegal ammunition. hungry turks. in their caffeine mystery the silent secret of ... that one, over there, one hand on his hip, the other one deep in his pocket holding a gun. the meat flower is now in my words meaning music
When the moment is over  the light we have turned inward the way as children we press a flashlight into our own flesh making each limb seem to smolder  when that light goes off we are saved once more by dailiness: the sun had continued its unbroken journey; the sheets may need smoothing as the forehead needs smoothing after fever. What we have learned we continue to learn as we continually memorize objects deep in our pockets: the key to a certain door; a coin whose severe face is worn to a smile. And we listen for echoes from the buried chambers of the heart whose messages are tapped out in unbreakable code, whose fires are stoked secretly even as we sleep.
I've seen bees, in the spell of a queen, mine the clover all afternoon and ants, those laborers, hauling crumbs to their elaborate dwellings and lazy crows waiting for something to be hit by a car so the pickings will be easy. And knowing they have no choice but to obey the imperatives of their natures, I've moved on without judgment to the flies born to be pests and the purple martins that eat them, and I've been amazed by the intelligence behind such work, what eats what, and how much, the incredible deathwork that is the life of the universe. And I've known the human-work that uplifts and cleanses, glassblowers as miraculous as seeds which hold the shape of flowers, ordinary people who rival the ant, who call forth in emergencies the cockroach's genius for survival. And I've seen the crow-people too, the sloth-people, the hyenas, have seen the cruelty of nature and the cruelty of economics merge and twist into confusion, and have marveled at the skunk and its gorgeous white stripe and its stink and have wondered if the outlaw, in the company of outlaws, planning his next job, isn't the happiest man alive.
Dead pomp sneering underground Glares up at a horned foot of clay Where the hog of multitude hangs around Among these tremendous memories That delegate to our day The superannuated and damned glories. A quidnunc with a shopping bag Stops gossiping with another hag And where immense conceptions were Dragged shrieking from the cellars here The ragged-arsed mechanics squat Owning what they haven't got. O rare rain of disinterest Descend on this fouled public nest And rout out all vulgarities That, crowding through its majesties, Gut to bare shell and bone The grandeur of the dead and gone. In car-park, garden and urinal The free and ignorant, almost As easy as at a Cup Final Gawk through the stone-transparent ghost Of this once noble house, now lost In the gross error of survival. &lsquo;Come,&rsquo; said my proud and sulking friend, &lsquo;Four angels up to Heaven's Gate, And looking down at Longleat So far below, shall disappear The human termite, leaving there Stones and spectres hand in hand.&rsquo; And from that aerial sweep of height The valley fell through depths of pine Down through green distances until From glimmering water rising bright Longleat, bird's-eyed in sunshine, Smiled up from its own funeral. I saw the heroic seizins fade And hide in laurels of old trees As brassbands of indignities Exploded echoes to degrade The splendours and the miseries Of that cold illustrious shade.
Bachelor Jack invites her to his country house for the weekend. He meets her with his live-in companion, a pet bear. Stand up like a gentleman and shake hands with the lady, Jack orders. She cringes, but the paw is smooth as velvet. Gingerly she strokes it. Smooth as after-dinner brandy. She strokes it again, praying don't let the beast leap forth. Not to worry, Jack reveals to her the button loop concealed on the lapel of his velvet smoking jacket, the chain for the bear is attached. They move indoors. A furry rug the color of candlelight covers the stone floor. The candle tips over, the rug catches fire, but she is secure, Jack knows what to do, he beats at the rug, folds her in and the loop in his lapel holds her firm.
&ldquo;Every time we part I feel older, tougher, and more determined to be with you for a good life,&rdquo; you wrote once in a letter when we were together only for a stolen day or a moment in the shadows of a zoo; and now as in the old days you were never so close as when one of us left, waving from the small window of the air liner, and the other flapped and semaphored as love became abstract, a point, and then a mere hope in the sky; so I've decided this time, leaving, it is to be ever more close to you  to get high enough to perceive from this seat of the common carrier what we are, what has been slurred or lost in the last months, what we fear in each other.
The noonday square. Plane leaves, dust: they scurry in heat shimmering gusts. Even shadows rustle. The Belgians are gone. The tiny terrier trots alone. Max prayed here,  <> but fourteen years, remember, that's one hell of a pose for a Paris swell. He had an infallible sense of scene. See that stone soul torn limb from limb between the devils and seraphim? Romanesque, of course, for Max to preen his own soul's pretty plumage here year after tiresome dusty year. And still, it wasn't easy.  This flat, hot land, the sluggish Loire; daily, nightly, daily:  no more blue-yellow visions of Christ on the tree (from Max's aquarelle), no more  blue movie Maries scolding  (to scandalize confessors), no more dandified mystics dogging his tracks. At Saint Beno&icirc;t, just dust. The trek to God? Beyond the crypt, it led from boredom to boredom to prison camp bed in Drancy. There, the Nazis let him die  an old Jew with pneumonia &ldquo;naturally.&rdquo;
Nothing can touch or be touched except bodies: Hang your sea-drenched garments at the surf-breaking Shore and they stay wet and get wetter. Carry them into the sun, and they dry. But how the water got into the shirt You left on the rocks, or how it was baked Out in the sun, you cannot see. The facts Of the body are small. After many revolutions Of the sun a ring on the finger wears Thin underneath, between the flesh and metal, As in a long marriage a wedding band Of gold becomes thin as a silk ribbon. To the bodies by which nature maintains The world the eye of man is blind.
&ldquo;Mrs. L&oacute;pez refuses to pay rent, and we want her out,&rdquo; the landlord's lawyer said, tugging at his law school ring. The judge called for an interpreter, but all the interpreters were gone, trafficking in Spanish at the criminal session on the second floor. A volunteer stood up in the gallery. Mrs. L&oacute;pez showed the interpreter a poker hand of snapshots, the rat curled in a glue trap next to the refrigerator, the water frozen in the toilet, a door without a doorknob (No rent for this. I know the law and I want to speak, she whispered to the interpreter). &ldquo;Tell her she has to pay and she has ten days to get out,&rdquo; the judge commanded, rose so the rest of the courtroom rose and left the bench. Suddenly the courtroom clattered with the end of business: the clerk of the court gathered her files and the bailiff went to lunch. Mrs. L&oacute;pez stood before the bench, still holding up her fan of snapshots like an offering this ulcerated god refused to taste, while the interpreter felt the burning bubble in his throat as he slowly turned to face her.
First to go, he left on the sudden shift of dawn, swung down the stairs and leapt the crest of bursting hedges. His yawn spit out the loss: at seventeen he believed beyond the blur of Brooklyn's sun that this day received him and the sky was his. On bridges steeled against the molten rising day, he learned the skill of hard men, of birds, silence hovering above the river. His blue eyes drilled the sky, his fingers clenched the narrow air, riveted by what he willed: to see something come of hands, the scissor of bone walking a lanky beam until the bird rose from the man, and he was home. Nerve slipped first: a hammer snapped and flung across the dimming whine; then memory left, a flapping wind that sprung and shuffled him between years of tin lunch pails. The union turkeys still would come Sundays when he would begin his tales, lose them, his hand drumming the couch, the meal done his heart collapsing under the rising keel of an admiring sun.
<>  Into our hand, saying, &ldquo;What diadem,  What gold of glory, what illustrious gem  Man shall desire of me, shall crown his brows!&rdquo; And nothing of all man's choice Life disallows,  Whether of prized or priced or priceless things:  By the feast-tables heaped with offerings,  &ldquo;Enter!&rdquo; he cries to all men, &ldquo;and carouse!&rdquo; And thus after our will, in greed and haste,  For certain years we choose and use and waste,  Suffer and strive: save some few restless men Who seek, uncrowned, unfriended, alien  And careless of the flushed festivity,  The path thro' life and death to liberty!
Hail to thee TESCO'S oan thi Esplanade, thi grechtest ferly that Dundee huz made, better by far than thi auld Tay Brig, given that a bauld man disna need a stick, he needs a wig. Twas in thi year o 1990, which Eh'll remembir as lang as Eh've a mind tae, that TESCO'S came oor way, resolved fur a few years tae profitably prey upon thi siller o thi fowk o Tay. Amang thae brichtsome dreels, verdant as thi Carse's leas, weavirs&rsquo; weans may browze fur farls, and also fur frozen peas. Roond teabags, polystyrene stovies, and cans o Grannie's soup: that's thi stuff tae pick yi up, should yir speerits droop. Aa thi fruits o progress ur available oan shelves, plus some fruits frae Sooth Afrika, that land o happy elves. Ut used tae be thi Empire that brocht us wir bananas, but noo, thanks tae grecht TESCO'S, we've jam fur wir todays an jam fur wir ma&ntilde;anas. And nivir mind thi marmalade that used tae be made here: ut still sez &lsquo;Dundee&rsquo; oan ut, sae ut huz tae be guid gear. In fact that is anither thing tae TESCO'S that we aawe: gif ut wisnae fur thi labellin, we widnae ken fuck aa. Gif ut wisnae fur thi labellin tae keep thi puntirs right, hoo'd we be able tae tell which puddin wiz black and which wuz white? Gif ut wisnae fur thi labellin tae keep us puntirs right, hoo wid we tell a sassidge roll frae yir aiverage pile o shite? Gif Dundee wisnae labelt thi city o &lsquo;Discoveree&rsquo;, hoo'd we be able tae tell ut frae yir run o thi rin-doon auld mill touns dumpit by thi sea?
hanged if n y in a real hot spell with o man what bubbies going places on such babies aint plenty good enough for i eu can have you rope
it is winter a moon in the afternoon and warm air turning into January darkness up through which sprouting gently,the cathedral leans its dreamy spine against thick sunset i perceive in front of our lady a ring of people a brittle swoon of centrifugally expecting faces clumsily which devours a man,three cats, five white mice,and a baboon. O a monkey with a sharp face waddling carefully the length of this padded pole;a monkey attached by a chain securely to this always talking individual,mysterious witty hatless. Cats which move smoothly from neck to neck of bottles,cats smoothly willowing out and in between bottles,who step smoothly and rapidly along this pole over five squirming mice;or leap through hoops of fire,creating smoothness. People stare,the drunker applaud while twilight takes the sting out of the vermilion jacket of nodding hairy Jacqueline who is given a mouse to hold lovingly, our lady what do you think of this?Do your proud fingers and your arms tremble remembering something squirming fragile and which had been presented unto you by a mystery? ...the cathedral recedes into weather without answering
Maybe morning lightens over the coldest time in all the day, but not for you. A bird's hover, seabird, blackbird, or bird of prey, was rain, or death, or lost cattle. The day's warning, like red plovers so etched and small the clouded sky, was book to you, and true bible. You died in utter loneliness, your acres left to the childless. You never saw the animals of God, and the flower under your feet; and the trees change a leaf; and the red fur of a fox on a quiet evening; and the long birches falling down the hillside.
She, returned in the form of youth black of hair and dress curls deaf in a poem. He, returned, sits as he would never sit perched on a radiator, smoking, balking sullenly at an obscure outrage. Only she who still lives, not as then but in the white hair of today, awkwardly laughs, at a loss for right words. Three familiar spirits present to me. The lamb and the ram removed from the packing case are neither gentle nor potent, but gray dead of having never lived, weightless plaster forms. What comes live (though a toy) out of the box is a black fox. Is it a fox? The dead girl rejoices (But wait  only now I remember she too is living changed by time and inward fires.) She takes the black animal I give her in her arms, its sharp nose poked at the long poem she is sunk in. He is gone to another room angry because the boy-child has seen a diagram of the womb. Why? Implacably laughing (now I laugh too) but unsure of my justice, I turn to assuage a quick fear my black sister is prying into my world, but the garnered poems, stirring letters, dreams, are undisturbed on the open desk. She reads on and is dear to me.
Like? Like what, that rare morning mist peeling off the  Like unshorn ewe's fleece in July unbandaging in soiled, rheum-coloured hanks. Newborn wool, rose-white rose-pink, shimmers beneath. Like smoke out of Apollyon's mandibles, as footsore Christian, easing free his burden, hurls it from a brightening threshold. Ah, salvation! Like history, raped Europa's incubus. Forked by the sun, turned by long tines of light into a light harvest. Let's take breakfast out to the terrace and deliquesce into summer forgetfulness. Behind the barn, fog-feathered grass scatters a sopping largess. Is that a line of sheep? No, marsh meadowsweet slipping a vein of cloud over iron brown peat.
stays home chained to loom program nights days till hair goes gray like old movies  says &ldquo;must go&rdquo; but stays due to being bound by endless duty to weave fates of future humans  too much for one non-contract programmer
Always I round your shoals (such blue-black, unyielding waters) mulling something, lifting the last stench of an idea, a mullah among the detritus and always you stand stagnant, ready to belch out something useful, something which only long grazing with the dead permits: I have come here singing of my own prison, a fence which has brought me back, stumbling, air-weary, blighted like my friends who believe their faces as black as mine that some dead white dance, some slim opening is the way outward: and trying to burn up the least hold of it trying to prune out every middling infatuation, every aping, every waterlogged lust for Bach, Camelot, Shostakovich, I come again to your shores: But there is something sweetly singing in your waters, sweetly drifting out of oily grass: here, you have seen it all; here you have watched them tether the long grass to an icy destruction: you have seen as the hands have touched, grown splotchy, finally lifting in some awful ambivalence: You tell me sitting as you have for tens of man- made years, your basin etched for beauty, your true beauty rooted in the long ways you have seen them come and muster: Watching you I know it is a beauty that man offers: it is not Mozart who is responsible for the vatic climbing; not Dante for the stairway; not Dostoevski for the ringing down below. I've heard it all. These men have set your shoals to singing.
<> then off to the church on the hill where he will pray kneeling on the cold steps, flanked with wooden banisters, unvarnished and so dry  upon which angels stand  painted, winged children holding up candles, <> An altar well-stocked with a holy skeleton and bits of hair, bits of clothes from a few good saints. He will pray kneeling  crawling up the twenty-eight steps with a square pillow for his knees and a different prayer for each step. <> while it snows across the Alps whitening all the farms to the colour of  and chilling the Tegernsee, forcing all the fish to swim deeper. The puppies were born yesterday but the pregnant mare waits quiet. In a week or so the farmer thinks while he cuts <>
And to dissolve the heaps. Afternoon lumber water filling can full Taxi call kids. Sharp cries spread rev motor whisper pony feet       Hoo! Hoo! Motor going gone (hill) Looking back her long hair shining pattern of crosses shadows on the walk (Hoo! Hoo! Ponyfeet) Ponysaddle afternoon all rich god Ganesha fills his waterpot. All to dissolve the lagers (layers) spreads of sounds waters, Sensations neutral low degree burn (sun) warmskin. Hears water, Again fills watercan the poor one not rich Ganesha, he is and glasses. All come worship fun in the sun. And to dissolve the fun. Worker basket empty and gone. gone in an Oxblood muffler though not cold after good hot dinner All come have fun dissolve values. Tibetan boss explains Layers of sounds hammer upon the ear spread selves away rich roaring bark (spurs values) menaces bishop (Distances) Image yards. Bogus is this freight! Gate measure stransound gone taxi Water whumps in can and fills softer, softer, gone of hearing. Dog is crazy angry barkleap fighting any wires. Gone basket of foliage Bangs on an old bucket.  Motorbike argues with some slops. Taxicry downhill in small city. Outcry! Disarms v. chords. Image yards spread wide open Eye tracks work their way everywhere. Mountain winds can harm voice. Sensation neutral low four o'clock tone is general. Must call a nun on the telephone. Two bad cheers for the small sun: burning a little life sunstorm: is not yet overcloudy winter! Send aid ideas to dissolve heaps to spread their freight.
In ancient Egypt, where so many famous queens reigned, a few were distinguished for their humane rule: not a man was denied merely because of his sex. Others, unladylike perhaps, and prejudiced no doubt by the deep-entrenched mode: mocked their catless gait, poked fun at needle-fumbling thumbs, at gruff voices against the gut-strung lute. (It would have been too obviously cruel to laugh at their lack of funds.) Many graciously adopted husbands into their own abodes; saying, &ldquo;Consider this your home even as it is mine. &ldquo;And, if the time should arrive when I desire you to leave  allay your fears, I intend to settle a good round womanly sum upon the bony scruff of your departing neck.&rdquo;
The first bird that sings sings for all birds, even when she stands for nothing but herself, a dun-colored finch on a dogwood branch. No telling what a bird knows, if this seems the first time light glowed on the horizon, or if she thinks her beak alone has pierced the night. We know nothing can be whole that hasn't been torn. There is no holy thing that hasn't been betrayed, the way notes, once forced into her tiny throat, come out this dawn as song.
As I went walking up and down to take the evening air, (Sweet to meet upon the street, why must I be so shy?) I saw him lay his hand upon her torn black hair; (&ldquo;Little dirty Latin child, let the lady by!&rdquo;) The women squatting on the stoops were slovenly and fat, (Lay me out in organdie, lay me out in lawn!) And everywhere I stepped there was a baby or a cat; (Lord God in Heaven, will it never be dawn?) The fruit-carts and clam-carts were ribald as a fair, (Pink nets and wet shells trodden under heel) She had haggled from the fruit-man of his rotting ware; (I shall never get to sleep, the way I feel!) He walked like a king through the filth and the clutter, (Sweet to meet upon the street, why did you glance me by?) But he caught the quaint Italian quip she flung him from the gutter; (What can there be to cry about that I should lie and cry?) He laid his darling hand upon her little black head, (I wish I were a ragged child with ear-rings in my ears!) And he said she was a baggage to have said what she had said; (Truly I shall be ill unless I stop these tears!)
And do you think that love itself, Living in such an ugly house, Can prosper long? We meet and part; Our talk is all of heres and nows, Our conduct likewise; in no act Is any future, any past; Under our sly, unspoken pact, I know with whom I saw you last, But I say nothing; and you know At six-fifteen to whom I go. Can even love be treated so? I know, but I do not insist, Having stealth and tact, though not enough, What hour your eye is on your wrist. No wild appeal, no mild rebuff Deflates the hour, leaves the wine flat. Yet if you drop the picked-up book To intercept my clockward look  Tell me, can love go on like that? Even the bored, insulted heart, That signed so long and tight a lease, Can break its contract, slump in peace.
If you want justice let it be demon justice that puts salt on the tails of the goody good. For the sins of omission, for leaving things out, not even a suspicion of John Thomas about  not even an inkling that Lady Jane is quietly twinklin' up the lane  not even a hint that a pretty bottom has a gay little glint quite apart from Sodom  that you and I were both begotten when our parents felt spry beneath the cotton  that the face is not only the mind's index, but also the comely shy flower of sex  that a woman is always a gate to the flood, that a man is forever a column of blood  for these most vital things omitted, now make requittal and get acquitted. Now bend you down to demon justice, and take sixty slashes across your rusties. Then with a sore arse perhaps you'll remember not quite to ignore the jolly little member.
When you said &ldquo;I think I know your mind,&rdquo; you touched me in the one private place left. The heat of those words ignites my face, declares a war between desire and dailiness. At the site of such longing all order disappears. I must summon arms: spoons in the fists of children, each beating its own martial measure; dates on the calendar marked in blood for births, for deaths; my only flag, a pillowcase bleaching in the sun on which no lover's head has rested yet. In the first moments of spring I too am threatened by thaw, deep underground. Spring is the shortest season. Let dailiness win.
I met the Bishop on the road And much said he and I. &lsquo;Those breasts are flat and fallen now Those veins must soon be dry; Live in a heavenly mansion, Not in some foul sty.&rsquo; &lsquo;Fair and foul are near of kin, And fair needs foul,&rsquo; I cried. &lsquo;My friends are gone, but that's a truth Nor grave nor bed denied, Learned in bodily lowliness And in the heart's pride. &lsquo;A woman can be proud and stiff When on love intent; But Love has pitched his mansion in The place of excrement; For nothing can be sole or whole That has not been rent.&rsquo;
Pretty Bonnie, you are quick as a rabbit, though your tail's longer, emphasizing suppressed disapproval, and your ears are shorter, two radar detectors set on swivels either side of your skull, and your yawn is a view of distant white spires not the graveyard jaw of this poor dead naked pink rabbit, who like you, was a technological success, inheriting a snazzy fur coat, pepper-and-salt coloured, cosy, and beautiful fur shoes with spiked toes. You're both of you better dressed than I am for most occasions. Take off your shoes and suits, though, what have you got? Look, puss, I've bought us a rabbit for supper. I bought it in a shop. The butcher was haggis-shaped, ham-coloured, not a bit like you. His ears were two fungi on the slab of his head. He had a fat, flat face. But he took your brother rabbit off a hook and spread him on the counter like a rug, and slice, slice, scarcely looking, pulled the lovely skin off like a bag. So, Bonnie, all I've brought us is food in this silly pink shape more like me, really. I'll make a wine sauce with mushrooms, but will you want this precious broken heart? this perfect liver? See, protected in these back pockets, jewels? Bonnie. What are you eating? Dear Bonnie, consider!
Head full of birdsthe languages of the world switching the scenerythe same old things a crowmomentary thicknesses of the air are hillsshadows below waver some clearnessnow these trees level the lawn across the street the sun there shift the world up out whistle in snow
<> Blinking their stories Come soft On the dusk and the babble; Little red gamblers, Handfuls that slept in the dust. Summers of rain, Winters of drift, Tell off the years; And they go back Who came soft  Back to the sod, To silence and dust; Gray gamblers, Handfuls again.
The message you send me is silence. It is a message I try to understand the way the roots of trees must understand the mitigating silence of water. We take from nature what we can. I study the silences of stars, of stones. I picture you miles north leaning over the empty page. Dear ... you want to write. But already the page is a window curtained in the early silence of snow.
My people, by whom I mean those curious sets Of non-relations in provincial towns, Sit ripening brightly in the  Of other poets. Here is one who follows A second-hand pair of shoes into the Courts Of Social History. Another ransacks His late unlettered father's bedside drawer And finds dead ukuleles littered there. What heraldic yet surreal landscapes! To lie in the bed of your ancestors And feel the fit. To hear the neighbourhood Stirring in its ancient sleep and rhyme The dead into their regiments of pain. The poverty of old shoes runs away With its own eloquence. And yet they write good books. But I think of an England where the ghosts Are restless solitaries or assassins. They cannot speak but run about in sunlight Demanding restoration of the birch And death as public as the crime is private. They have lost time. The Russians on Burns night Celebrate their history of combustions. Their people lie in complete unity In graves as large as Europe and as lonely.
My 200 inch eyes are trained on you, my love spectroscope Breaking down your wavelengths With my oscillating ear I have painted your Portrait: ermine curled about Yonder's glistening neck They say you are light-years Away, but they understand so Little You are so near to me We collide Our stars erupt into supernovae An ecstatic cataclysm that Amazes astronomers I enter your Milky Way Seeking out your suns Absorbing your heat Circumventing your orbs Radiating your nights Once inside your heavens I hop from world to world Until I can go no longer And Z out in your dust Your new constellation Known for my shining process And fish-tailed chariot
here is a conventional dress pattern short sleeves, high waist, slightly flaring skirt if this dress could swing as dresses do in summer it would swing with the best of them but this is not a dress it is made of handmade paper stained by black tea veined by human hair not the infant's fine hair but thick, heavy strands that twine through the dress like veins beneath a baby's skin exposed, a living highway this dress form is as stiff as the one worn by the Infanta in that portrait by Vel&aacute;zquez La Infanta, baby princess stands poised, ladylike, prepared to assume her considerable privilege as infant as royalty as daughter of the ugliest king in Europe who sits astride numinous stallions as the Inquisition strips away the flesh of the sinful the intellectual the Jews and the Moors whose hair has not the fine, lank texture of the king's coiffure but whose ideas have a power even Vel&aacute;zquez recognizes, secretes in his shadowy portraits of Philip and his family His harsh brushstrokes comb the pointed beard of the regent, streak the soft folds of the Infanta's silk dress, catch the sour breath of a dying empire as does Chrysanne's miniature dress that types the wearer (if there was a wearer) surrounds her in a token of pain not the first hard thrust into life's bright air but the daily material that makes a life being lived choices and consequences pinching the nerve spirit over flesh joy or despair love or the dream of it pricking the skin, dancing in the veins mocking the girl's goodness making the grim details of the baby's growing up a laughing matter like cancer of the esophagus or a shotgun blast to the heart
Oh, that this lashing wind was something more Than the spirit of Ludwig Richter ... The rain is pouring down. It is July. There is lightning and the thickest thunder. It is a spectacle. Scene 10 becomes 11, In Series X, Act IV, et cetera. People fall out of windows, trees tumble down, Summer is changed to winter, the young grow old, The air is full of children, statues, roofs And snow. The theatre is spinning round, Colliding with deaf-mute churches and optical trains. The most massive sopranos are singing songs of scales. And Ludwig Richter, turbulent Schlemihl, Has lost the whole in which he was contained, Knows desire without an object of desire, All mind and violence and nothing felt. He knows he has nothing more to think about, Like the wind that lashes everything at once.
<> Soar and dip and fall for glee! Happy sky, and bird, and ground! Happy wind, and happy tree! Happy minions, dancing mad! Joy is guide enough for you; Cure the world of good and bad; And teach us innocence anew! Good and bad and right and wrong! Wave the silly words away! This is wisdom to be strong! This is virtue to be gay! Let us sing and dance, until We shall know the final art; How to banish good and ill With the laughter of the heart!
<> To memories of him that had their will Of her in the dark house below the hill, She married her longing to another man, While the bawdy wind kept clutch upon the lock And crickets clicked their small obscenities From dooryard weeds and cankered apple trees, And minutes trickled dryly through the clock. Like one who bars a door against the dark She made a refuge of reality, Daring him entrance, spirit or bodily; But when the hearthfire glimmered to a spark Came a long whistle fluting down the lane And a pebble snapped upon the window pane.
It is nothing that they did or could have helped, two people falling in love. Not even because they shared a toothbrush, once. It is their germs getting acquainted. For weeks they take turns being sick  one makes the tea, the other answers the phone. Slowly, they can't tell better from worse. This goes on until one dies.
Each bead of the mist is burning with the joy of a resurrected soul. A will within it draws it back from me a little the cove, a beach of shallow pools behind the sandbars, and the bay without motion blending, somewhere into the fog, the infinite empire of floating fiery light. Alone, tracing the cove that curves like a breast and slowly fills the shrinking beach with light a heron stalks. She stands on one leg very still, for a long time. The blade of her beak jabs  water breaks and the speared minnow flashes in air, is swallowed before I can be sure she has moved at all. A ripple spreads its dying rings. She has been given an invisible sign, she reaches out great wings and launches into slow deliberate flight, trailing legs like reeds, thrusting the serpent's curve of throat toward the all-consuming light where earth melts into water, water into air and the air is alive with fire  She's gone, leaving a stillness where I breathe in a savage calm beyond desire.
Face the moon. Ask: is it less, now that man has been there? That's what some claim. They say we've dirtied that gleam and lovers must look elsewhere for support, Venus or the stars burned out, burning with illusion like all love. We kill our wives to have the other woman. When wives die they fix us in their final stare. Their eyes ask why. We turn away ashamed. We move to the country where the nearest law and telephone are miles beyond the humorless rim of the mountains and we beat our dogs at dawn. Their howls can't reach even the next farm. Their eyes ask why. We move back to the city. Our lives are sodden on our backs. We shuffle alley to alley alone, mumbling thanks for a dime we know's devalued like the moon. Once, beached by storm, we found a shark jaw polished by tide, light from China, sand. We shouted, &ldquo;We are wealthy,&rdquo; at the moon. No confirming word came back. Only the level wind slanting our fire east and we leaned west against direction and sang. We didn't care our words lived less than a moment in sky.
When mynahs scream in the cages  siamese cats with black on their paws  tiptoe from the sulphur mines of the sun  into the shadow of our house. Father sits with the sunflower at the window  deep in the yellow of a revolving chair,  fat, bilious, witty, drawing small ellipses  in the revolving air. And plunges in a parallax of several eclipses  to our earth where we pull grasshoppers&rsquo; wings  and feed red ink and lemon-peel  to dragonflies. And if that daffodil too flaps all morning  in grandma's hands, how can my daughter  help those singing yellows  in the whites of her eyes?
The walls of Southern pine or Northern brick still stand where you crumpled or just stopped short of the smashed jaw and the gut rip. They dog us to our dugouts like the expected thing that didn't happen. All these years so easily you've turned, twisted, whipped the impossible shot home, then nonchalantly trotted in to knock our children back into their rude country dreams. Even the Birmingham Bombers could do nothing to change you: you were born to straddle center. But Time is always a rookie forcing the walls to move back, forcing owners to expand the green aisles where legs do not often stumble and snap, forcing players to take up the options of men. Yet your eyes are still fiery and tight as those of children who sleep and wake running with backs to the man with the stick, hustling like hell to get where you are: that glorious circle of light dead in center with the ancient faces of Bombers patting you on the back like any hometown hero. You are their myth, uncommitted until the last crack of the bat, still on your toes and taking hung curves in stride as you sweep into and out of the white lights, and not one has told you their children are not on their toes, whose cleats dig in like bombs, whose eyes are something to see.
Are these mellifluous sheep, And these the meadows made twice-melliferous by their bleating? Is that the famous mechanical wind-up shepherd Who comes with instructions and service manual? This must be the regulation white fleece Bleached and starched to perfection, And we could be posing for our first communion pictures, Except for the nasty horns. I am beginning to think this might be The Angelic Breeders Association's Millennial Company Picnic (all expenses paid) With a few large black dogs as special guests. These dogs serve as ushers and usherettes. They're always studying the rules, The exigencies of proper deportment When they're not reading Theocritus, Or wagging their tails at the approach of Theodora. Or is it Theodosius? Or even Theodoric? They're theomorfic, of course. They theologize. Theogeny is their favorite. They also love theomachy. Now they hand out the blue ribbons. Ah, there's one for eveyone! Plus the cauldrons of stinking cabbage and boiled turnips Which don't figure in this idyll.
Poor human race that must Feed on pain, or choose another dish And hunger worse. There is also a cup of pain, for You to drink all up, or, Setting it aside for sweeter drink, Thirst evermore. I am thy friend. I wish You to sup full of the dish I give you and the drink, And so to fatness come more than you think In health of opened heart, and know peace. Grief spake these words to me in a dream. I thought He spoke no more than grace allowed And no less than truth.
The brook glides on to the river,  The river glides to the sea; Each seeks for a broader channel,  For broader channels, we. If we throw the tiniest pebble  From the fring&egrave;d, sylvan shore, The river in widening circles  Flows onward, so calm before. The zephyr softly trembles  The glist'ning waves along; The gentle drip of the rain drops  Makes sweeter their quiet song. Word-pebbles flung by the heedless,  Will ripple the calmest life; But the kindly hints of friendship,  Like zephyrs, soothe the strife. And the priceless tears that only  From sympathy can flow, Like raindrops, cool the fever  Of the troubled waves below. The brook glides on to the river,  The river glides to the sea; Each seeks for a broader channel,  For something more yearn we. For a fuller, deeper knowledge  Of the mystery life enfolds, That puzzles as does the process  By which the sculptor moulds. The child to the skies' rose-tracery  Lifts often his earnest eyes, Now, lit with a sense of its beauty,  And now, with a vague surprise. So erst gazed we on these marvels,  Nor thought of the Master-hand That colors the delicate moonbeams,  And seashells among the sand. So we, still like little children,  Have read not one-half the scroll, Have learned not one-half the lesson  Life gives to the thoughtful soul. Oh! when will all joy be perfect?  Oh! when will all thought be free? Why question? We glide like the river,  Toward a vast, vast sea. The brook glides on to the river,  The river glides to the sea; Our yearnings will blend with the chorus  Of God's ocean, Eternity!
In an alley just around the corner From the Singapore Methodist Book Shop Lighted by coconut candles Stands a hawker's glittering barrow. The wares laid out so lovingly When at last you recognize them Are not for humdrum or unseemly uses As foiling conception or fending off diseases But designed to ENHANSE THE MARRITAL PLESSURES. Some akin to vacuum-cleaner fittings Sprouting circlets of frisky goat's hair Or the painted feathers of little birds While others are stoutly buttressed Or bulge with beads in garish colours  Knick-knacks and gewgaws set out neatly. A Sikh presides, ancient and sleepy With sacred appurtenances and saintly smile. If you were a woman, you reflect You'd gather up your skirts and run a mile. The guru flicks a pack of faded papers Affirming the contentment of MARRITAL CUPPELS Whose names are past deciphering. Many are the matrimonies he has saved Just around the corner from the Methodists But peoples of now, he warbles sadly Are too much working to joy their blessings. Only bats play curiously about the barrow.
Time-clock to the moral prim-mouth female Marking the date due with ruler-rapping look, And dictionary to the briefcase-laden student Clerking for fact in fiction's careless file. Musty to many, a smell like attic trunk. For girls and eyeglass weaklings, athlete scorns. To the bored matron, hostile hours to kill, And punishment like church to the vivid running child. Enemy, roars the fascist, burn it down! Escape from what is real, romantic sighs ... Surely among a billion words, the liberal pleads, Answer, emblazoned in gold, will leap like melody? But only to the writer is it all. Powerful as a boss, books are his bowing bank. Refugee outside, this is his waiting wife To talk with in his own known tongue. Iodine smarting his wound, bread to his furious want, His January sun, his August cool green shade. Within these walls he lives as hermit hero, (and listen) Here is his ticking monument when dead.
In this family everyone knows everything, you can't say a word we haven't heard before. We're geniuses in this way, accomplished, forecasters of misery and fleshly grief, prepared, as if we read it in the paper, for the overwhelming incident, the final straw coming in the mail. It's what's already here that baffles us, sends us screaming from the room. It doesn't have to be much; the chilly noise we've heard each night for years, the beggar's wish that staggers through my brother's eyes, again today; the same stupid, mercenary thoughts like peaches rotting on a windowsill, torment us, like promises unkept. But as clairvoyants we're unbeatable. A glance, a wish, a whisper in the mind, and we know it all. We see who'll soon betray, smiling like a dog, the other's hopes again, we taste the acid lie about to burn the mouth. We're most ourselves when we hear the stranger's car turn into the drive and meet the mournful face as it begins to stutter out the worst, the awful facts we rehearsed and memorized just yesterday.
Dead, Mister Crosby, dead This unbelieving generation Would smother you in soft white christmases Molasses of gossamer indulgence Your greatness, sharp legato greatness O Mister Crosby, Mister Crosby, Mister Crosby (I trust that I can make the matter clear) You were greater far before all that That going other people's ways down various roads When you would take it up and keep it going keep it going With Mercer, Mister Mercer ... also dead No &lsquo;entertainer&rsquo;, but an actor, a true histrion Did you not act with Fields and not upstaged? Fields, W.C., dead also, long ago in glory Didn't you ramble with Armstrong, also dead We've got to &aacute;cc&eacute;ntuate the p&oacute;sitive Eliminate the negative of smooth Sinatra I got a message from the Mocking-bird That Sinatra was dead on his feet Sinatra made of plaster like our Joanie Biederbecke taught  Music, disced Debussy and Stravinsky, And it stuck. You got rhythm but also Style, like you said There are a few enthusiasts left Who can tell the difference Between the first and second versions of That Old Black Magic Got me in its spell Bob White Mister C We're gonna break it up tonight
By mid-century there were two quaggas left, And one of the two was male. The cares of office weighed heavily on him. When you are the only male of a species, It is not easy to lead a normal sort of life. The goats nibbled and belched in casual content; They charged and skidded up and down their concrete mountain. One might cut his throat on broken glass, Another stray too near the tigers. But they were zealous husbands; and the enclosure was always full, Its rank air throbbing with ingenuous voices. The quagga, however, was a man of destiny. His wife, whom he had met rather late in her life, Preferred to sleep, or complain of the food and the weather. For their little garden was less than paradisiac, With its artificial sun that either scorched or left you cold, And savants with cameras eternally hanging around, To perpetuate the only male quagga in the world. Perhaps that was why he failed to do it himself. It is all very well for goats and monkeys  But the last male of a species is subject to peculiar pressures. If ancient Satan had come slithering in, perhaps ... But instead the savants, with cameras and notebooks, Writing sad stories of the decadence of quaggas. And then one sultry afternoon he started raising Cain. This angry young quagga kicked the bars and broke a camera; He even tried to bite his astonished keeper. He protested loud and clear against this and that, Till the other animals became quite embarrassed For he seemed to be calling them names. Then he noticed his wife, awake with the noise, And a curious feeling quivered round his belly. He was Adam: there was Eve. Galloping over to her, his head flung back, He stumbled, and broke a leg, and had to be shot.
When there were no depths I was born, when there were no sources of the fountains of the sea At hand's length I grapple to confine the overlapping flaking of the core, no waves I am left with the fine edge of my amulet fingered in my pocket, if I shaved any longer I'd try the neolithic razor on my hair, the sea is postcard of my fountain Out of the dry sea, Dr. Moon. And tears now that the fountain, O Jazer: raise up your breaths, monkeys. Let us look on the windshield, the mirage of the sun, the rain-slick petrol-ridden Diesel-dewed is my rain-slip, dark is my glass- es, I'm following a truck I am full, to overbearing I play pocket-pool with sources whose edge cuts my finger Look Jazer: it weeps
He cuts into a slab of wood, engrossed, violently precise. Thus, yesterday, the day before yesterday, engines of fantasy were evolved in poster paints. Tonight a face forms under the knife, slashed with stern crisscrosses of longing, downstrokes of silence endured  his visioned own face!  down which from one eye rolls a tear. His own face drawn from the wood, deep in the manhood his childhood so swiftly led to, a small brook rock-leaping into the rapt, imperious, seagoing river.
Saturday as I sat by the Shenandoah river I heard the Sunday singing wandering over, When is he heading for heaven it sang, With a flower at foot and a bird in hand. I lay by the Shenandoah river and saw The sailing ships sailing down to the sea; I heard the sailors singing and heard them sing We are sailing to Paradise through the sea. And the Shenandoah singing as it goes Murmurs to me as I lie on the shore, Wander away with me from a world of woe, Come to heaven's Californian shore. So down I went on the Shenandoah river Floating along like a ship or a queen, I floated down past the world and then went Into the greatest place that I have ever seen. And when I went in I heard the Sunday singing He is home in heaven now I heard it say; And I saw below the ships still sailing, And the Shenandoah going down to the sea.
The church is way over in the next county, The same trip that last year we trekked Carrying a sackful of ears to collect The nickel-an-ear porcupine bounty. Pictured on the wall over dark Jerusalem Jesus is shining in the dark he is a lamp. On the tray he is a pastry wafer. On the way home, there is regular talk Of the fine preaching, before the regular jokes Are allowed. The last time over The same trail we brought two dollars homeward. Now we carry the aftertaste of the Lord. Soon a funny story about Uncle Abraham: How, being liquored up, he got locked out By his woman; how she must have taken blankets out Later, for Sam says he found them, in the morning, Asleep in each other's arms in the loft. The sunlight streams through the afternoon Another parable over the sloughs And yellowing grass of the prairies. Cold wind stirs, and the last green Climbs to all the tips of the season, like The last flame brightening on a wick. Embers drop and break in sparks. Across the earth Sleep is the overlapping of enough shadows. In the wind outside a twig snaps Like a lid shutting somewhere in the ear. Jesus, a boy thinks as his room goes out, Jesus, it is a disappointing shed Where they hang your picture And drink juice, and conjure Your person into inferior bread  I would speak of injustice ... I would not go again into that place ...
October  its plangency, its glow as of words in the poet's mind, as of God in the saint's. I wept for your mother in her pain, wept in my joy when you were born, Maia, that October morning. We named you for a star a star-like poem sang. I write this for your birthday and say I love you and say October like the phoenix sings you. This chiming and tolling of lion and phoenix and chimera colors. This huntsman's horn, sounding mort for quarry fleeing through mirrors of burning into deathless dying. Rockweight of surprising snow crushed the October trees, broke branches that crashing set the snow on fire.
Love plays a lute, and Thought an organ grand. These tones are stately, those a restless strain, Seeming by cadenced joy to measure pain, And capture Fancy by the soft airs fanned. Thought sends his p&aelig;ans thrilling through the land; The worshipers that bow before his fane Find rest in contemplation, spirit-gain In sweetest harmonies. Yon rapturous band, Kneeling to catch the music of the lute, Have yearning in their eyes, yet something there That baffles all our reas'ning; is it peace, Or only glances with beseeching mute? Sometimes it deepens into holy prayer. Enchanted Love! thy music never cease!
Cottonwool clouds loiter. A lawnmower, very far, Birrs. Then a bee comes To a crimson rose and softly, Deftly and fatly crams A velvet body in. A tree, June-lazy, makes A tent of dim green light. Sunlight weaves in the leaves, Honey-light laced with leaf-light, Green interleaved with gold. Sunlight gathers its rays In sheaves, which the wind unweaves And then reweaves the wind That puffs a smell of grass Through the heat-heavy, trembling Summer pool of air.
The roots of a dead universe are shrunken in my brain; And the tinsel leaf&egrave;d branches of the charred trees are  strewn; And the chaff we deem'd for harvest shall be turned to  golden grain, While May no more will mimic March, but June be only  June. Lo! a ghost enleaguer'd city where no ghostly footfall  came! And a rose within the mirror with the fragrance of it hid; And mine ear prest to the mouth of the shadow of a name; But no ghost or speech or fragrance breathing on my faint  eyelid. I would crash the city's ramparts, touch the ghostly hands  without. Break the mirror, feel the scented warm lit petals of the  rose. Would mine ears be stretched for shadows in the fading  of the doubt? Other ears shall wait my shadow, can you see behind  the brows? For I would see with mine own eyes the glory and the  gold. With a strange and fervid vision see the glamour and the  dream. And chant an incantation in a measure new and bold, And enaureole a glory round an unawakened theme.
Asleep and awake, I wake. Never having written What I have to say. No poem offers of me My central meaning, I have danced to my naming And danced away. Now I move past my dreams: They yield processions of Changing images. I want to speak the clear The intricate meeting-place Of all things with all desires: Cut down by risk to the root Where everything is given. The finding of the child, The lost voices, songs of all Who take their meanings. They are beginning the songs. Mortal, awake, I sing and say All is immortal, all Save personality. Yes, your passion, yes, the time of a flower. Move in all your meanings, Go lit by many fires, Deep in the secret fires All speak to all. The deep life lives and dies Changes, sings, and sings. Speak before I sleep, Before the keepings are given, I find my time, and speak, Driven toward love and music, Music of forms and desires.
Last night, my son, your pretty mother came Bravely into the forest of my dreams: I laughed, and sprang to her with feet of flame, And kissed her on the lips: how queer it seems That the first power of woman-love should leap So sudden on a grown man in his sleep! She smiled, and kissed me back, a lovely thing Of slender limbs and yellow braided hair: She set my slow heart madly fluttering, Her silver beauty through the shadowed air. But oh, I wish she'd told me at first sight, Why she was breaking on my dreams last night! For tears to kisses suddenly succeeded, And she was pleading, pleading, son, for you: &lsquo;Oh, let me have my little child,&rsquo; she pleaded, &lsquo;Give me my child, as you alone can do.&rsquo; And, oh, it hurt me, turning a deaf ear, To say &lsquo;No, no!&rsquo; and &lsquo;No, no, no!&rsquo; to her. I was most violent, I was much afraid She'd buy my freedom with a kiss or curl, And when she saw she'd die a sad old maid, She wept most piteously, poor pretty girl  But still, if Day, recalling Night's romance Should write a sequel, child, you've got a chance.
I fucked your mother on top of a house when I got through she thought she was Mickey Mouse. I fucked your mother under a tree when it was over she couldn't even pee I fucked your mother and she hollered OOOO she thought I was fu man chu I fucked your mother and she started to grin then she found out it wasn't even in.
The bird begins, But not the unimpeachable heart; It has sung forever  The mayfly crushed in the grinding craw Gleaned of its instant. But the forever song, Immortal in the bursting throat, Binding bird to bird, Breaks with that wild welling; Forever outward, Forever away, The clear expenditure Seized up out of the mayfly's juice, Spilled and spoken. Over and over and never done The instant endures. The nightbird broods and dozes, awaiting its dusk, Its dull ear scarcely attuned to the rapturing torrent That blots transience out, Blots time, Leaves the bare energy of the expending throat Wide on the wind. The blacksnake quits his cold tunnel, Twines in the bush. In a bare room The eyes that watched the migratory stars, That saw dawn draw, Saw cirrus, snared of the light, Turn smoke-color, Dove's-breast and dun, Lie under their lids And see no more. The watch falters once in the limp vest And then runs down. The flesh waits on for its old earth And another try.
<>  Often when morning rose above the rain  She waved her white hand at the window-pane, And passed and mounted thro' the fields of air. I never saw her face or felt her smile   She seemed to pine among the haunts of men;  Till at the last I left my city den, And followed in her footsteps for a while. She led me where the light shines freely down,  She set me by the river-fringes green,  And turned herself; and in her face, I ween, The glories of all worlds to me were shown. Her radiant front is not of mortal mould,  Her look is of the lands which are not seen,  Broad is her brow, somewhat austere her mien, Yet magical her beauty to behold. For all the friendless way hedged with offence,  For all the hours forsaken of her face,  Now to behold in peace her peerless grace Is and remains my perfect recompense.
They lay as if in ambush to embrace me, the ones who sadly saw me go away and those who knew me only as a name. Alas! they lay in wait to tear and eat their totem with the callous arrogance of hungry youth and crowded me their questions though I was tired to drop it is my doom. Insoluble puzzlers about the war  for the draft was breathing hot on them again  how to dodge with honor or be jailed with joy; as usual they were too fastidious and too imprudent. (I had rougher thoughts.) Other or the same another hour  baffled by sex: one didn't have a hard-on, another had at the wrong time and place, as usual; and there were timid girls who needed babies but they met no fathers. Yet others or the same again and again and oh! by now I knew them pretty well  brought out their paintings and their poetry for me to auscultate and teach each one by showing what he did not know he meant. So war and love and art were still the themes that my young ones laid bare before their friend, till finally I got away to supper. We equals talked about the community and this was great and sad, as usual, still promissory, never glorious, smoking with love that did not burst in flame. And  we planned to answer the ambiguous Sphinx that was destroying our community  although the lake, as usual, lay hushed and the Smokies ominously stood around not growing old, but we were growing old. If I were there, we should have lived that play! <> I came away having seen no new thing, in tears and pleased because I was much loved, tired and proud because I was much used, discouraged because I was not rightly used.
When Catrin was a small child She thought the foghorn moaning Far out at sea was the sad Solitary voice of the moon Journeying to England. She heard it warn &lsquo;Moon, Moon&rsquo;, As it worked the Channel, trading Weather like rags and bones. Tonight, after the still sun And the silent heat, as haze Became rain and weighed glistening In brimful leaves, and the last bus Splashes and fades with a soft Wave-sound, the foghorns moan, moon- Lonely and the dry lawns drink. The dimmed moon, calling still, Hauls sea-rags through the streets.
Because we love bare hills and stunted trees And were the last to choose the settled ground, Its boredom of the desk or of the spade, because So many years companioned by a hound, Our voices carry; and though slumber bound, Some few half wake and half renew their choice, Give tongue, proclaim their hidden name &lsquo;hound voice.&rsquo; The women that I picked spoke sweet and low And yet gave tongue. &lsquo;Hound voices&rsquo; were they all. We picked each other from afar and knew What hour of terror comes to test the soul, And in that terror's name obeyed the call, And understood, what none have understood, Those images that waken in the blood. Some day we shall get up before the dawn And find our ancient hounds before the door, And wide awake know that the hunt is on; Stumbling upon the blood-dark track once more, That stumbling to the kill beside the shore; Then cleaning out and bandaging of wounds, And chants of victory amid the encircling hounds.
The beer company did not hire Blacks or Puerto Ricans, so my father joined the picket line at the Schaefer Beer Pavilion, New York World's Fair, amid the crowds glaring with canine hostility. But the cops brandished nightsticks and handcuffs to protect the beer, and my father disappeared. In 1964, I had never tasted beer, and no one told me about the picket signs torn in two by the cops of brewery. I knew what dead was: dead was a cat overrun with parasites and dumped in the hallway incinerator. I knew my father was dead. I went mute and filmy-eyed, the slow boy who did not hear the question in school. I sat studying his framed photograph like a mirror, my darker face. Days later, he appeared in the doorway grinning with his gilded tooth. Not dead, though I would come to learn that sometimes Puerto Ricans die in jail, with bruises no one can explain swelling their eyes shut. I would learn too that &ldquo;boycott&rdquo; is not a boy's haircut, that I could sketch a picket line on the blank side of a leaflet. That day my father returned from the netherworld easily as riding the elevator to apartment 14-F, and the brewery cops could only watch in drunken disappointment. I searched my father's hands for a sign of the miracle.
As flames do work and wind when they ascend So do I work my  as if the only light there'll be is in the fire that tortures the green wood. While yet I hear a friend who pleads with me  <> <> <> If we but trust the songI know its course is free and straight and steady goes to work its good; it needs but trustunquestioning, a burning without smoke, a heat transparent in its constancy. This fire's to be a simple fire that would so burn. I do not suspect its source.My will goes with its coursing where it will, and every word in every turn is so. This water is but water.This is no other water than it is,nor more nor less, that's meant to bless, and works no magic but our bliss.
In sun-whetted morning, the dropped gull splayed on sand, wind picking at its feathers. Over the headlong toppling rush and leashed-back mica'd fall of the sea, gulls scouting and crying.
Black hat for conscience black suit for defiance black shoes for going to or coming from a funeral limping silent and steady without a mother or money his purpose narrow as a sword glittering and dusty under the afternoon sun no wine guitars or roses only one dog barking along the sharp edge of his path so pointed he becomes at its far end before dissolving in light a furious black period.
O bee, where is your sting, where is the thing That smart men are afraid of, or that love Uses to offset miracles of flesh? If you ask questions of the bee, does he Know how to answer for a woman's heart? The bomber buzzes, and the bee is quiet. But on that cherry-tree what cherries hang Hung on man's miracle of nerve and pain, That in the lines of wounded writes a song, Tells of what bluebells and what bees that buzz? The buzzer lifts his monumental face To see that poetry keeps in its place. The sage or magus in his infinite skill Offers the present in a white crystal, Looks at the cherry-tree and finds it true. But what is he to make of buzzing bee? The bee that buzzes is his mystery, The question like a hammer beating in the brain, From point to point, as bee from flower to flower. Is a just war juster than a just peace? If we are then to speak of justices, Philosophical questions in the raw, Should we not question even the cherry-tree? Is it symbolic of the fruit or flower, And does the flower matter or the fruit, Or do both come like manna from the root? The wise child in the corner testifies To the strict merit of its temporal toys, Loving at first the quickening railway train, Then, bored with that, enamoured of some doll. The doll that's sawdust too. The house of bricks Collapses at the onset of the wind. What is the pointer then to the just future? Which is to live, the cherry-tree or love? O buzzing bee, art is a thing of love, Flickers in and out of bush and flower, Gathering honey even from a war, The pints of blood the panting soldier gives, Because he gives for causes that are true. The cherry-tree belongs perhaps to him, Perhaps to someone other, some brave man Who languishes his life out behind bars, Put there by the political design Of those who hate both bee and cherry-tree. Yet he achieves, as soldier in his dying, As honest men in living, one red fruit. A cherry on the tree of human life. For he, and those like him, form the solid root On which the future tree will grow to bear What miracles for bees to ponder on!
He stands up against the lonely sky, Roves down the rocky hillside in the sun, Searching for me among the speckled crags, Whilst I, all my blood hammering in terror At the doorways of my throat, crouch close To him among the ilyx bushes and poinsettias. My dress is in his hands, my white dress bound With scarlet borders. His thick hair grows gold Like clusters of uncrumpled hyacinth, And his little horns are blunt and white, Clean as the budding points of lilac bloom; His sunny skin is smooth and amber brown  Stooping in his search he loosens pebbles Down the steep hill with his little hoofs. The terror of those dark haunches, shaggy With goat-skin; and the sloping eye-slots, Grape-green; and the prong of yellow beard; And the pointed teeth. Now he gives up. Pulling in pieces my shrieking dress He passes me to search the leopard grove, Heedless of the snapping asphodels. He tears a rich bunch of scarlet berries And crops them from the curved cup of his hand While ripe juice oozes down his beard points. Among the sunny patterns of the grove He howls; baffled, he throws dead wood At the red squirrels. And I am safe, though naked.
What armies ride November clouds And white apocalypse on the sky, Ruin the walls of glorious Rome And in the birch woods burn down Troy? &ldquo;Ubi sunt&rdquo; in antiphon The wood sings to the curlew's cry When perilous knifelight upwood strikes At pale shreds of a winter day. The wild guest wings his glorias far From lean hedgerow and pillaged choir Yet silent fields intone a hymn. Beyond the hills a sudden star Walks upon the winter clear Calling Kings to Bethlehem.
There dwells a goddess in the West,  An Island in death-lonesome seas; No towered towns are hers confessed,  No castled forts or palaces; Hers, simple worshipers at best,  The buds, the birds, the bees. And she hath wonder-words of song,  So heavenly beautiful and shed So sweetly from her honeyed tongue,  The savage creatures, it is said, Hark, marble-still, their wilds among,  And nightingales fall dead. I know her not, nor have I known:  I only feel that she is there: For when my heart is most alone,  Her deep communion fills the air,  Her influence calls me from my own,   Miraculously fair. Then fain am I to sing and sing,  And then again to fly and fly, Beyond the flight of cloud or wing,  Far under azure arcs of sky; My love at her chaste feet to fling,  Behold her face and die.
The Buenos Aires Vase, one mile across, flickering with unsleeping silent flames, its marble carved in vine-leaves mixed with names, shirtless ones and  a collier's iron collar, riveted, stamped by his Burntisland owner; a spade from Babiy Yar; a blood-crust from the blade that jumped the corpse of Wallace for his head; the stout rack soaked in Machiavelli's sweat; a fire-circled scorpion; a blown frog; the siege of Beirut in stained glass; a sift of Auschwitz ash; an old tapestry-set unfinished, with a crowd, a witch, a log; a lachrymatory no man can lift.
I tire of lovely faces free from pain  And free from sin; Here none with lips wet with the crimson stain  May enter in. One thing I lack, and lacking it, am dead   A woman's heart. &ldquo;She cannot enter here,&rdquo; an angel said;  I will depart. I have one prayer that I will make to God,  That I may stay Where lies my body underneath the sod.  Then night and day I shall be where my dear false love may pass;  It will be sweet To hear above my head, upon the grass,  Her little feet.
<> long  Some blissful, sweet, but dim foreboding dream, Wherein the soul hath kissed some joy supreme But knows not whence nor whither, sight or song  Mary awoke 'midst her lone chamber's throng Of chanting silences. Her soul did seem Aware as earth is at the dawn's first gleam  Of strange primordial moods it gropes among. With the day's full-blown rose of light she knew Her dreams had been her marriage-bed with God; Her soul now trembled in its nakedness Before the Bridegroom: while her heart lived through The consecrating, tender period Till she should hold her Child with a caress.
President Roosevelt, you Are our Commander in Chief. As such, I appeal To you for relief. Respectfully, sir, I await your reply As I train here to fight, Perhaps to die. I am a soldier Down in Alabam Wearing the uniform Of Uncle Sam. But when I get on the bus I have to ride in the back. Rear seats only For a man who's black. When I get on the train, It's the Jim Crow car  That don't seem to jibe With what we're fighting for. Mr. President, sir, I don't understand Democracy that Forgets the black man. Respectfully, therefore, I call your attention To these Jim Crow laws Your speeches don't mention. I ask why YOUR soldiers Must ride in the back, Segregated  Because we are black? I train to fight, Perhaps to die. Urgently, sir, I await your reply.
I am weary of this loving and this grieving, Lay me down beneath the bending willows, Strew upon me petals of the bleeding roses, O my mourners. I am weary of this loving and this sighing, Bring me sweet Aljulia ere I meet the boatman By the shining waters of the mystic river, O my mourners. Let me hear the breezes singing low of Heaven, Let me feel the cool of earth upon my body, Let me hear the laughter of the little children, O my mourners. I am the dusk, The dreamborn soul Of yesterday; I am the hope Of true Love's birth,  The Man in Chains. I am the star Whose light descends Beneath the sea; I am the rose Whose perfume lives Beyond the years. I am thy rod, I am thy staff, O brothers pale; For thee I live, For thee I die, O brothers mine.
Those all-night concerts in India that began at dusk and went on till nearly dawn. In the open, the audience squatting on the ground. A platform for the performers. The singer, usually suggesting the melody and a soft tabla, played with the hands, giving the rhythm. The songs were the love ragas of of Krishna and Radha. The god and the cow-herding girl he loved: Let the earth of my body be mixed with the earth my beloved walks on. Let the fire of my body be the brightness in the mirror that reflects his face. Let the water of my body join the waters of the lotus pool he bathes in. Till I learned that the scale of Vedic music is different than ours, sometimes I thought a woman's voice was flat; it was dropping eighth tones, but when I got used to the scheme of it, the singing became very compelling. It moved me deeply. I can hear it still and see the scene, the audience silent in its appreciation of the artistry. The shadows over the crowd lit up by flaming lamps on the sides of the square and over the performers' platform.
Naked in woods apart, A radiance in his eyes, He crouches to surprise The breathing hart; So kneels to aim his dart; The feathered arrow flies; The peril he defies Stands here, revealed by art. A touch, and time is gone; The loins their flight fulfil; Mark the dead hunter's skill Here where his window shone. Look, and the limbs are still. Walk, and the eyes look on.
Frost called to water &lsquo;Halt!&rsquo; And crusted the moist snow with sparkling salt; Brooks, their own bridges, stop, And icicles in long stalactites drop, And tench in water-holes Lurk under gluey glass like fish in bowls. In the hard-rutted lane At every footstep breaks a brittle pane, And tinkling trees ice-bound, Changed into weeping willows, sweep the ground; Dead boughs take root in ponds And ferns on windows shoot their ghostly fronds. But vainly the fierce frost Interns poor fish, ranks trees in an armed host, Hangs daggers from house-eaves And on the windows ferny ambush weaves; In the long war grown warmer The sun will strike him dead and strip his armour.
I try my best but the word won't come; I acknowledge that my speech is lame; I am the child with the burnt tongue. Christ, it hammers at my skull, This sound that I cannot expel, It grows until it seems to fill All consciousness. One frail word A trap only silence can avoid. While others read I sweat Listening to my blood's journey, The thin blue pulse that throbs above the eye. But when I scream The hated school hangs breathless About me. Boys&rsquo; blunt faces Like the pebbles they put into my mouth.
In the clean, anodyne Hotel room in Athens, I am suddenly homesick for The Indian night And my dark cell In Orissa Where I was visited By a white lizard With emerald eyes, By an articulate frog, And sometimes, very late, By a wandering shrew. The lizard chittered And danced; The shrew ran compulsively Along the wall; The frog, When I lifted him up, Gave a single heart-rending cry. In my unmysterious White room, I miss the chittering, The cry of despair, The silent, lunatic trot  It is too sane here for words.
I have this dream, doctor: I'm living in this town where I have become old. Neighbors too have become old, and they stay in their houses, getting up late and coming out only for their morning paper. Our trees have grown thickly around us, and the hedges reach high between. Our street stretches away, very quiet. Is this dream all right, doctor? Is there anything wrong with me? Sometimes everything seems normal, but other times I feel some slow, faint alarm come over me. This isn't the way the world felt before. It has become much less important; I think some good spirit or god has gone away and left us on this aimless planet getting fainter and quieter and smaller, spinning through the sky. Tell me, doctor, is my dream all right to have?
It is not the moon, I tell you. It is these flowers lighting the yard. I hate them. I hate them as I hate sex, the man's mouth sealing my mouth, the man's paralyzing body  and the cry that always escapes, the low, humiliating premise of union  In my mind tonight I hear the question and pursuing answer fused in one sound that mounts and mounts and then is split into the old selves, the tired antagonisms. Do you see? We were made fools of. And the scent of mock orange drifts through the window. How can I rest? How can I be content when there is still that odor in the world?
If the stars fell; night's nameless dreams  Of bliss and blasphemy came true, If skies were green and snow were gold,  And you loved me as I love you; O long light hands and curled brown hair,  And eyes where sits a naked soul; Dare I even then draw near and burn  My fingers in the aureole? Yes, in the one wise foolish hour  God gives this strange strength to a man. He can demand, though not deserve,  Where ask he cannot, seize he can. But once the blood's wild wedding o'er,  Were not dread his, half dark desire, To see the Christ-child in the cot,  The Virgin Mary by the fire?
He holds his hurt like a fresh kill, dares me to take it. With a child's triumph I grip the talons that know only gripping, his hooked beak slashing at my leather gloves, ragged bone jutting from the limp left wing. In his shed he listens to the barnyard hens he used to terrify. When I open the door he blinks in the flashlight glare and seizes me in his great yellow eyes. Alone with the dark he stirs my gift of cold mice. He does not eat. He was the shadow against the stars, the blur at the edge of my headlights, the ghost who discarded headless sparrows in the dust outside my gate, the voice that called in the pines when nothing else spoke. Four days of death are all he can bear. I find him raking his claws in the heavy dirt that will not let him go. In the morning specks of straw are stuck to his eyes. He hangs in my hand like nothing, a husk, as if all he was had been life itself. Long after dark, with only coyotes awake, I hear his voice. Beneath Orion, barefoot in the dry grass, I raise my arms in the cold south wind, close my eyes and almost fly.
I was looking to thicken my garden. My neighbour said he would give me a piece of his aquilegia which grew everywhere and set root easy as walking. When I was next out in the garden I found the clod of it, clean-sliced, in the grass. I put it in quickly, stood up like the daisies children stick into mud-pats, and it huddled to itself, wilting. But the cleaving of its roots did not kill it. Its curly ornate flowers sprang up so commonly they would have choked everything. Now, halved and roughly transported with black bin liner wrapped at its roots, it is feeling its way through the tense walls of the new garden.
Is it sounds     converging, Sounds   nearing, Infringement,     impingement, Impact,   contact With surfaces of the sounds Or surfaces without the sounds: Diagrams,    skeletal,     strange? Is it winds     curling round invisible corners? Polyphony of perfumes? Antennae discovering an axis,     erecting the architecture of a world? Is it  orchestration of the finger-tips,     graph of a fugue: Scaffold for colours:     colour itself being     god?
<> All the things I never said,  Oh, are they unrecorded as The movements of the waves? Oh, will they vanish vanish as The trails of ships at sea? I know not, but they sometimes come Like little ghosts of things unborn, And flutter, furtive, through my dreams, And haunt the dusk with wistfulness, And sometimes through the things I say They pulse and pulse, as silent as The ocean's heartbeats coursing through The veins of singing leaves.
Some fumbling, turning it this way and that: OK, here it is, the doctor said, and there was the little tumor of nerves or blood that ought not to be there: my brain's upper right window, a little face peeking out, a child who won't go to bed: little knot of cells little hairball on the sill, Benign is what he said, as God is said to be, but for a moment I still stood,  I could almost feel it with my foot, in the place where they had stood: John and Jane and Billy. Then I was in the corridor again, it was Spring Street in February and raining, and the negatives slipped into a plain brown envelope so I could take them home with me.
Neither our vices nor our virtues further the poem. &ldquo;They came up and died just like they do every year on the rocks.&rdquo; The poem feeds upon thought, feeling, impulse, to breeditself, a spiritual urgency at the dark ladders leaping. This beauty is an inner persistence toward the source striving against (within) down-rushet of the river, a call we heard and answer in the lateness of the world primordial bellowings from which the youngest world might spring, salmon not in the well where the hazelnut falls but at the falls battling, inarticulate, blindly making it. This is one picture apt for the mind. A second: a moose painted by Stubbs, where last year's extravagant antlers lie on the ground. The forlorn moosey-faced poem wears new antler-buds, the same, &ldquo;a little heavy, a little contrived&rdquo;, his only beauty to be all moose.
Punch   two feet tall, more or less sexless and lacking adrenal glands;  expert on good and evil) Johnny   of the local gymnastic club; helps old ladies across the state highway  and collects wild berries and waste paper) The Princess   jewellery, speaks foreign languages as well as the speech of the  common people; she is post-pubertal but still waiting for her  dragon) The Dragon   preserved) The Water-Sprite Michael   often found himself at sea, hence his bronchial and respiratory  catarrh) Little Red Riding Hood   jobs, grandmother an alcoholic) The Witch   warts and a burlap bundle; readily multiplies into groups of two  to four; fries only with honest-to-goodness fat) Old Man &Shacek;krhola   to have a clear-cut opinion on everything; dressed in a subfusc  coat and a sheepskin hat because a man should keep his head out  of the wind) Old Dame &Shacek;krhola   national costume; regarded as an expert on the biographies of all  the other puppets) The Sorcerer Gruntor&aacute;d  in such a mess that minor miracles occur spontaneously) Doctor Faustus   poodle has already caught it from him) Mat&yacute;sek the Cop   and drumsticks; huge shako with a peak, does not acknowledge  civvies; mostly invents his decrees) Marguerite  The King  Knights, devils and others.
&lsquo;Everything has vanished, there remains a mass.&rsquo; Will you feel safe if this should come to pass? Kill all the species and yet keep the class? Not at a flash, but something dark crept out over stone by stone, eating. Not at a shout something stilled the cars on the roundabout without a crash, they froze, they turned to smoke. Not with a roar, black fire dropped on the oak, wrapped the bluebells in an indigo cloak. Not with a scream, the lasers at the rave dimmed, the beat grew distant, faint and grave, the dancers were spent fireflies in a cave. And soon the sun went out, the seas were gone, and every being was silently waited on by a devouring shadow, and if dawn came up there was no one left to know, no eye to see the fields, far less to sow, no seeds even to will themselves to grow. But somewhere, we are told, there is a mass, a body deep under the snuffed-out grass and garages and graves and interstellar gas, a pulsing squat magnetic incubator programmed slow, slow to be the reinstator. How long the vanished wait, till late, and later!
O, I wad gang tae Harrogate  Tae a kirk by Temple Moore, Wi' a tall choir and a lang nave  And rush mats on the floor; And Percy Dearmer chasubles  And nae pews but chairs, And there we'll sing the Sarum rite  Tae English Hymnal airs. It's a far cry frae Harrogate  And mony a heathery mile Tae a stane kirk wi' a wee spire  And a verra wee south aisle. The rhododendrons bloom wi'oot  On ilka Simmer's day, And it's there the Airl o' Feversham  Wad hae his tenants pray; For there's something in the painted roof  And the mouldings round the door, The braw bench and the plain font  That tells o' Temple Moore.
O thou new comer who seek'st Rome in Rome And find'st in Rome no thing thou canst call Roman; Arches worn old and palaces made common, Rome's name alone within these walls keeps home. Behold how pride and ruin can befall One who hath set the whole world 'neath her laws, All-conquering, now conquer&egrave;d, because She is Time's prey and Time consumeth all. Rome that art Rome's one sole last monument, Rome that alone hast conquered Rome the town, Tiber alone, transient and seaward bent, Remains of Rome. O world, thou unconstant mime! That which stands firm in thee Time batters down, And that which fleeteth doth outrun swift time.
In the cities there is even no more any weather the weather in town is always benzine, or else petrol fumes lubricating oil, exhaust gas. As over some dense marsh, the fumes thicken, miasma, the fumes of the automobile densely thicken in the cities. In ancient Rome, down the thronged streets no wheels might run, no insolent chariots. Only the footsteps, footsteps of people and the gentle trotting of the litter-bearers. In Minos, in Mycenae in all the cities with lion gates the dead threaded the air, lingering lingering in the earth's shadow and leaning towards the old hearth. In London, New York, Paris in the bursten cities the dead tread heavily through the muddy air through the mire of fumes heavily, stepping weary on our hearts.
This time they're thirteen, no longer interested in the trillium on the path but in each other, though they will not say so. Only the chaperone lingers at the adder's tongue, watching the teacher trail the rest uphill to where the dense virginal forest thins and opens. At the clearing, she tells them to be still and mute and make a list of what they see and hear. A girl asks if she should also list the way she feels she's the one who'll cite the shadow on the lake below. The others sprawl on gender-separate rocks except for the smart-ass, perched on the cliff-edge, inviting front-page photos  PICNIC MARRED BY TRAGEDY. From time to time, in the midst of the day's continual lunch, as the students read the lists their teacher edits, the boy swears and stretches  he is in fact fourteen, doing seventh grade a second time, this same assignment also a second time. Pressed, he says he sees exactly what he saw before ponds, rocks, trees  shouting it back from the same vantage point out on the twelve-inch ledge, Long Pond a ragged puddle underneath him; and what he shouts grows more and more dangerously insubordinate as he leans more and more dramatically over the edge. But he is, after all, the first to spot the hawk; and it is, looking down on it, amazing. The others gather near the unimpeded view, together, finally, standing on this bluff overlooking three natural ponds, hearing the wind ruffle the cedar fringe, watching the hawk float along the thermals like a leaf. And for a moment, belittled by indifferent wilderness, you want to praise the boy, so much does he resemble if not the hawk then the doomed shrub fanned against the rockface there beside him, rooted in a fissure in the rock. But soon the hero swings back up to earth, the group divides. Just like that they're ready for home, tired of practicing: sixteen children, two adults, and one bad boy who carved a scorpion on his arm.
Priest, is any song-bird stricken  Is one leaf less on the tree? Is this wine less red and royal  That the hangman waits for me? He upon your cross that hangeth,  It is writ of priestly pen, On the night they built His gibbet,  Drank red wine among His men. Quaff, like a brave man, as He did,  Wine and death as heaven pours  This is my fate: O ye rulers,  O ye pontiffs, what is yours? To wait trembling, lest yon loathly  Gallows-shape whereon I die, In strange temples yet unbuilded,  Blaze upon an altar high.
And arrives where all are strangers, all are kind. He thinks, We are familiar, surely, since they are kind, and yet seem strangers  or I am someone other than I think, myself the only stranger. They come close now with smiles and offerings, with large sounds, with faces luminous and vague, with gestures inviting one to sit down, to dine, to take one's ease, to stay among them or, if one chooses, to leave in peace, but later, later on. He thinks it endlessly, teasingly perplexing; he asks, Whom do they find so lovable? Someone they are awaiting? Am I that person? And believes himself an impostor imposing, a grabber of gifts intended for others, but senses afterward how impersonal their kindness, how profound their courtesy, that they should have greeted him as brightly had he been any other. This is reposeful, a final kindness, a tact, not to require response and answers. If there was another life, he hardly remembers it now, or if he came this way on a particular errand, and cannot declare for certain this is the place he started for. His gestures mean to say  <> <>
&ldquo;Long enough. Long enough,&rdquo; I heard a woman say  I am that woman who too long Under the web lay. Long enough in the empire Of his darkened eyes Bewildered in the greying silver Light of his fantasies. I have been lying here too long, From shadow-begin to shadow-began Where stretches over me the subtle Rule of the Floating Man. A young man and an old-young woman My dive in the river between And rise, the children of another country; That riverbank, that green. But too long, too long, too long Is the journey through the ice And too secret are the entrances To my stretched hidingplace. Walk out of the pudorweb And into a lifetime Said the woman; and I sleeper began to wake And to say my own name.
<>  Wild as the heart's uncomprehended dole,  Strange as the grieving of a mighty soul  Touched with the lyric woe of life and death. Phraser of world-wide monotones that toll  Like far enormous bells from sky to sky,  Voice of the vaster solitudes that lie  With life's solution past the mind's control. The golden eyes of long-forgotten days,  The dolorous memory of simple things,  Sadden thy lapsing chords: the present pays The past's arrears of sorrow, and they seem  To wake a sense, among thy weeping strings,  Of other lives, like some unceasing dream.
1.  She walked into the bar.  I heard a faint hissing noise. 2.  &ldquo;I am full of shaving brushes  so people think I am a shaving brush,&rdquo;  she said. I did not understand. 3.  she looks more like me than I do,  as is the way with the exploited.&rdquo; 4.  go near the bathroom. 5.  I can feel only  the soft parts of the brushes  and the hard parts of the brushes.  This is what he has done to me.&rdquo; 6.  to force my mouth  you will never know.  I had no time to swallow.&rdquo; 7.  coughing and spitting up lengths of horsehair.  &ldquo;It gets worse as the years pass,&rdquo; she said. 8.  She looked at me with a face full of pity  as though it was not important  to hear the birds singing. 9.  and that is the worst thing of all.&rdquo;
Lyon is a city of two rivers and Roman aqueducts two thousand years old. I come by snake-roads through the faces of three mountains, following butterflies and the tracks of old bones. I find you in the hour of molding and the time of two rivers running here. Old fingers press into clay.  <> I look into eyes that have seen through stone. I listen to lips that gave language to the clay. I touch the spidery hands that bent bronze into blues. <> Your blood hardens into stone. &ldquo;Study nature,&rdquo; your say in riverwords that pulse two veins in Lyon and leave Roman remains. Your young-old eyes scorch the underbrush in Mississippi, New York, Jamaica, Italy, and Sweden as one flame. Bronze burning in black fingers shed the thin skin, shed twisted muscles, shed teeth and tears, leave the  mountain butterflies to show the way. Two rivers swell in Lyon. Clean the old dust. <> <> Your blood hardens into stone poems.  <> eyes clean me, let me know the years you read muscles torn from proud black chests, from open stilled mouths, from wide nostrils and ebony bones and now reading me. How I ache from being opened in these hours, cut by these mountains, these rivers. Who were you once in marble reincarnation? A statue? A flesh carved god? A rock leading to mountaintops? Who you will be next will meet me. We cannot say goodbye here. <> <> One man lifts his wings. His neck veins stretch alive. The sun boils him. This land heats a kiln, this history a steady fire. Two rivers burn. <> <> The clay now bakes its own warning. The statued marble collects the prize of blood. Can these words too become breathing bronze, or rock cut tall to ride horseback in Haiti, to swing machete <>
There's a solitude I fear but know I want, like a small house in a village in northern Sweden, snowed in most of the dark year, but warmed by a powerful little stove, like faith. Old books on a sagging shelf: most of a purely technical nature  obsolete naval engineering, some worn novels, and my favorite, a child's history of the world. I work at a story, my own, only to make sense as the kettle sings, and eat off a chipped blue plate, and caulk every new crack to avoid the thin lips of the wind. You're not here, so I tell you snow is as various of hue as your roses or evil or love, so I renounce all claims to knowledge excepting this: Things won't be reduced. Things just won't. They are too proud. I have no radio, no mirror, no mail service and still I hope, waiting as though for revelation but it's here, a snow of many colors. This is a child's history of life. Of course, I need you, and, of course, when you come, all will revert to the old confusion. A man in one of these books comes home and doesn't know it, so strange are they both.
What though I dreamed of mountain heights,  Of peaks, the barriers of the world, Around whose tops the Northern Lights  And tempests are unfurled! Mine are the footpaths leading through  Life's lowly fields and woods, with rifts, Above, of heaven's Eden blue,   By which the violet lifts Its shy appeal; and, holding up  Its chaliced gold, like some wild wine, Along the hillside, cup on cup,  Blooms bright the celandine. Where soft upon each flowering stock  The butterfly spreads damask wings; And under grassy loam and rock  The cottage cricket sings. Where overhead eve blooms with fire,  In which the new moon bends her bow, And, arrow-like, one white star by her  Burns through the afterglow. I care not, so the sesame  I find; the magic flower there, Whose touch unseals each mystery  In water, earth, and air. That in the oak tree lets me hear  Its heart's deep speech, its soul's dim words; And to my mind makes crystal clear  The messages of birds. Why should I care, who live aloof  Beyond the din of life and dust, While dreams still share my humble roof,  And love makes sweet my crust.
I come upon the laurel blooming deep in the woods, tiny fists of flowers barely pink among so many green leaves. Is it for my astonishment it blooms or for the deer that come early to feed? Is it for the wreathmakers searching the woods who pause at the hawthorne with its bouquet of thorns? Ask Apollo, burly god of song.
When I was a child I walked a forest floor Charred black after the great trees burned. The air was acrid. Among old roots the fire still crept. Sometimes a small blue flame Licked at the soles of my feet, While overhead Birds hunted their nests. Fifty years ago I saw what it means to burn. I met the destructive flame, But only now I am old Have I come know Its name.
I hear the halting footsteps of a lass In Negro Harlem when the night lets fall Its veil.I see the shapes of girls who pass To bend and barter at desire's call. Ah, little dark girls who in slippered feet Go prowling through the night from street to street! Through the long night until the silver break Of day the little gray feet know no rest; Through the lone night until the last snow-flake Has dropped from heaven upon the earth's white breast, The dusky, half-clad girls of tired feet Are trudging, thinly shod, from street to street. Ah, stern harsh world, that in the wretched way Of poverty, dishonor and disgrace, Has pushed the timid little feet of clay, The sacred brown feet of my fallen race! Ah, heart of me, the weary, weary feet In Harlem wandering from street to street.
The angels in the corner crowd this postcard, ready to fly wherever the mails might take them. They have the scrubbed faces and the gauzy hair of my daughter's friends in high school chorus, their cupped mouths brimming with hallelujahs. Wrapped in the reds and golds of cherubim those rough girls too dreamed about boys, and when van Eyck was done grew up and married them and died. Today I pin their picture to my wall where the bronze notes of the sun's great harp can strike them back to song.
Seen by the lych-gate pushing his bike, then down near the goods yard later that night. Blond, freckled, slightly asthmatic, thought to be wearing a corduroy jacket. Friends and neighbours are combing the sidings, frogmen and dogs will arrive in the morning. A particular man from Burton Agnes is helping police with their enquiries.
mobiles: that the wind can catch at, against itself, a leaf or a contrivance of wires, in the stairwell, to be looked at from below. We have arranged the form of a formula here, have taken the heart out &amp; the wind is vague emotion. To count on these aspirants these contenders for the to-be-looked-at part of these actions these most hopeful movements needs a strong &amp; constant wind. That will not rise above the speed which we have calculated, that the leaf remain that the wires be not too much shaken.
Last night the moon lifted itself on one wing over the fields and struggling to rise this morning like a hooked fish through watery layers of sleep, I know with what difficulty flowers must pull themselves all the way up their stems. How much easier the free fall of snow or leaves in their season. All week, watching the hospital gown rising and falling with your raggedy breath, I dreamed not of resurrections but of the slow, sensual slide each night into sleep, of dust or newly shovelled earth settling.
A droning vicar bores the congregation and misquotes  If anyone should deliver an oration it should be me, her son, in poetry. All the family round me start to sob. For all my years of Latin and of Greek they'd never seen the point of &lsquo;for a job&rsquo;, I'm not prepared to stand up now and speak. <> the simple rhymes that started at her knee, the poetry, that &lsquo;sedentary toil&rsquo; that began, when her lap was warm, with ABC. Blocks with letters. Lettered block of stone. I have to move the blocks to say farewell. I hear the family cry, the vicar drone and VALE, MATER 's all that I can spell.
Our April must replenish the delightful wells, Bucket's lip dipping, light on the sleeping cells, Man from his vigil in the wintry chapel Will card his skin with accurate strigil. O frivolous and astringent spring We never come full circle, never remember Self behind self years without number, A series of dwindling mirrors, but take a tangent line And start again. Our April must replenish Our bank-account of vanity and give our doors a coat of varnish. Leave the tedium of audits and of finding correct For the gaiety of places where people collect For the paper rosettes of the stadium and the plaudits. And you, let you paint your face and sleek your leg with silk Which is your right to do As gay trams run on rails and cows give milk. Sharp sun-strop, surface-gloss, and momentary caprice These are what we cherish Caring not if the bridges and the embankments Of past and future perish and cease; Before the leaves grow heavy and the good days vanish Hold out your glasses which our April must replenish.
Between the ebb of dusk and turn of night, mosquitoes gentle as thistledown alight from the violet air and settle on my hands and in her hair. She brushes them away, and mutters at the choice of pawn or knight. The wind across the dry field carries the chinks of bats like jewels. The coolness forces us inside. The board set on tatami mats. She opens windows, loosens nets. Outside the rice-farmers burn scrub to stubble. Mars and Sirius are dulled, and the moon ages with dust. She sits. &lsquo;My husband is dead.&rsquo; &lsquo;I'm sorry. How old was he?&rsquo; Over the board, her eyes predict, calculate. Her hands are veined and livered, tapping at a pawn and moving on. &lsquo;He is dead.&rsquo; &lsquo;We were married in Autumn. We say  <> <> &lsquo;What did he do?&rsquo; &lsquo;He bought me red cicadas. Closed in his hands, like this. Like little birds. They sang <> against the drawn lines of her features. Taps, taps. Lancer. King. &lsquo;Now he is dead. The cicadas will not sing again. Ever ever.&rsquo; The sky accumulates darkness.
So many times I've been along this trail and never once lost my way. Are its traces lost today? Has the wild grass covered it all? Still, in my mind I know there's nothing to fear, for a wind in my favour suddenly begins to blow. I shall surely know you the time will come  for you know me. Lamp in hand, I used to go alone. Its flame's gone out. Yet in my mind I know the address is written in the language of the stars. The wayside flowers, I know, will check my errors and guide me gently by their scents' secret codes.
a thing spoken speaks in me I see the spoken thing a word hail pestilence &amp; from your face a curse is poured out &amp; a bone is set in motion spoken in disgust to see the one who speaks it a foreigner, you say, the dew like blood her city broken empty for her sake has blessed you, seed of them I will pursue &amp; you will say in blood: leave me alone
Time, the copper money of the sun, That grows, pure wampum, on another's wrist, Keeps happy even in Antarctica Love's misers and their girls. But that fool's gold, The pollen of the hours, is lost upon My ignorant heart. What other lovers make Their study how to turn time's seasonal flower To the alchemic rose Eternity Is not my magic now, black miles in time From her. It is my industry to spend Hours others hoard and all my summer wealth To bring our traveling hearts safe home again. Now, autumn. Pages from the calendar, Like snow, will hide both summer and its pain. I wait the winter bear of our desire To cross the last mountain to our honey tree.
The dawn alps, the stilled snake of river asleep in its wide bed, &lsquo;to exemplify something we desire in our own nature.&rsquo; Or six miles down below our hawkstill swiftness the sea wakening. And when we come to earth the roofs are made of tiles, pigeons are walking on them, little bushes become shade trees.
Why should I sing when every living voice Carols in joy for my love's holiday? Why should I laugh when all the skies rejoice, Blue-girt and silvered in each sun-kissed ray? Yea, though the skies, the earth, each God-sent thing, In flowering field, or glen, or deep-set moor, Croon softly each to each, still shall I sing, Tho weak the chords or be the accents poor. These shall I bring for my love's golden fare, These shall I give as down my days she trips  Song-burthened zephyrs for her wind-blown hair, Garlands of laughter for her crimson lips, Laughter or song, 'tis but love's joyous fee, Deep from the treasure of my heart to thee.
Around the family my brother's sure of himself, he doesn't want advice, extra love, he's sown his life right up to the doorstep and knows it prospers, he can look out the window and see how well he's done, nobody has to tell him, nobody can accuse him of failure. I'm always a little dizzy in his house, a little lost and indecisive, I let his daughters kiss me and make me play odd complicated games they make up that go on endlessly until we are so tired we want to fall asleep on the floor. My brother's always fixing things, always planning, he scrapes the rust off a hinge, gets down on his knees and looks into the crawl space for what's rotten down there, finds it and gouges it out while his daughters win again at their indecipherable games; his wife sits in the kitchen looking around, she gave up a career for this, she barks and complains in the empty kitchen as the night stands up close against the windows like big hands covering her eyes, she has counted to a hundred and is about to get up and put a stop to something, somewhere, in some house.
No such thing as Western civilisation No such thing as Eastern civilisation The brand name for a tribe of killer apes is civilisation The killer apes do some little good things So let's all do the little good things good things good and not many of them  Coconuts in the pacific ocean of bad things bad things calling themselves civilisation What the hell if the tribe collapses Look out look out for another tribe of apes who do no killing but do big good things Meanwhile look up up above your head only the rain is collapsing on you Of course there's not much bread in doing little good things but do do do altogether all the do do day Because, speaking as a brother-speck among the galaxies, Little is the biggest we can call ourselves
There is something I want to tell you beyond love or gratitude or sex, beyond irritation or a purer anger. For years I have hoarded your small faults the way I might hoard kindling towards some future conflagration, and from the moment you broke into my life, all out of breath, I have half expected you to break back out. But here we are like the married couple from Cerveteri who smile from their 6th-century sarcophagus as if they are giving a party. How young we were in Rome, buying their portraits on postcards, thinking that we too were entangled already beyond amputation, beyond even death, as we are as we are now.
Dearth and annihilation come from the East, The East wind scenting to kill All that exhibits lithe vigour, and leave it still. Hard now it blows, and until this wind has ceased, Man will need fire, and a byre for fodder and beast. It yearns for wolves that none may survive on earth, Through skeleton branches praying: &lsquo;Rocks, remain grey, nor delude yourselves with playing, As children do with red kites and snows from the North&rsquo;: And fiercely it snarls on whatever creature goes forth. It crisps and shrinks any trace of food or surviving Charity on this cliff. Its passage leaves grasses withered and white pools stiff, Cramping the sources of life with its hard-thrust kniving And crippling the rust-broken harrow past all driving. It whets on the quivering waves its knives of steel, Sweeps across dune and sedge To blacken what signs of creation remain in the hedge Where motionless horses shelter, or cattle kneel, Then whistles where twigs no weight in a wren's legs feel. Reaching the spinney, it falls with a deadly gust On green spines, sparkling and brilliant, And is there lassooed by a body, braced and resilient, Roping down, like one whom it cannot trust, Its enemy, ready to parry the strongest thrust. Claim your dead, but the fire in the fists we clench Will turn your attacks to folly. Our sons are intent, and brighter than winter holly Races live blood in the faces you thought to blench, As out of your grasp these branches for Christ they wrench.
You wake one afternoon in an accustomed city  There is a dog barking; children are somewhere  Suspicious that whatever you came to see Doesn't care either now. Landscapes, wherever, Have gone pretty vague: the heat leaves a haze Not immediately apparent, accumulating in the distance. You await the demystification of darkness. Pinpoints of light, preoccupied, follow paths Of precise variation small cars whining out of sight  There is, then, some connection with your scene. Now that the sun has gone and matters are settled, Fainter configurations beckon out of the blackness: Lights shine, flicker like a brushfire, like stars. It is meant to be a wonderful city, dedicated To a man who managed to love what was around him. You think your desires, too, are fashioned As they are perceived, merely habitations Seen at the limits of vision; like these lights Illuminating a site no doubt as dark as your own, Where children contemplate the fruit trees And old men talk in whispers with the birds.
The first frosts, my father, still without shoes, chased in the cows for milking, leaping from spot to tropical spot where they'd lain. On Christmas mornings he'd find only socks on his plate, and a sprinkling of hay where the reindeer had been. In summer his mother used black-market sugar to can  the greater sin, to leave the peaches to rot. When damp bales of hay burst into flame, he ran from the barn to kneel by her bed, her blond hair splayed on the pillow case, her fevered face bright as an angel's. The parlor was never as silent as when black-clothed relatives came to sit for the loss of the barn, before all the men came back in their work clothes to hammer timbers into trusses and hoist cross beams against that clear sky. Nor as silent as when they returned to sit with his mother's body, on chairs drug in from the kitchen, while he sobbed alone behind the new barn. When he came home from college, dreaming at last in English, he reached for words that didn't exist in Pennsylvania Dutch to talk with his aunts, and for the first time wondered what you could think if all you spoke was a language with words enough for cooking and farm work and gossip.
how generous is that himself the sun  arriving truly,faithfully who goes (never a moment ceasing to begin the mystery of day for someone's eyes) with silver splendors past conceiving who comforts his children,if he disappears; till of more much than dark most nowhere no particle is not a universe  but if,with goldenly his fathering (as that himself out of all silence strolls) nearness awakened,any bird should sing: and our night's thousand million miracles a million thousand hundred nothings seem  we are himself's own self;his very him
It is winter in California, and outside Is like the interior of a florist shop: A chilled and moisture-laden crop Of pink camellias lines the path; and what Rare roses for a banquet or a bride, So multitudinous that they seem a glut! A line of snails crosses the golf-green lawn From the rosebushes to the ivy bed; An arsenic compound is distributed For them. The gardener will rake up the shells And leave in a corner of the patio The little mound of empty snails, like skulls. By noon the fog is burnt off by the sun And the world's immensest sky opens a page For the exercises of a future age; Now jet planes draw straight lines, parabolas, And x's, which the wind, before they're done, Erases leisurely or pulls to fuzz. It is winter in the valley of the vine. The vineyards crucified on stakes suggest War cemeteries, but the fruit is pressed, The redwood vats are brimming in the shed, And on the sidings stand tank cars of wine, For which bright juice a billion grapes have bled. And skiers from the snow line driving home Descend through almond orchards, olive farms, Fig tree and palm tree everything that warms The imagination of the wintertime. If the walls were older one would think of Rome: If the land were stonier one would think of Spain. But this land grows the oldest living things, Trees that were young when Pharaohs ruled the world, Trees whose new leaves are only just unfurled. Beautiful they are not; they oppress the heart With gigantism and with immortal wings; And yet one feels the sumptuousness of this dirt. It is raining in California, a straight rain Cleaning the heavy oranges on the bough, Filling the gardens till the gardens flow, Shining the olives, tiling the gleaming tile, Waxing the dark camellia leaves more green, Flooding the daylong valleys like the Nile.
<> Plume-fall of evening captures the Turk's East, and I wonder  The bright-ribbed Alexander ... Many in the berried light, riper, The women. But he came with a stiffness of swan, With a tongue thick with galleys. As one with toads or jewels at mouth speaking, (And the waves pounding at Cypress) He came, left hanging in air The shaking cliffs and carrions. Moonlight, wilderness cover; The small wind dries on the bush, The sail folds in Marmora. Oh when will he return to this wooden moonlight, when uncover All we were ever to see that unfilled tomb The women murmur for.
<> Was getting queer, and asked if it was strange For one who lived on prairies all her life To want a house where she could see the range. He said she hummed around a lot and walked At sundown through the gate and up the draw, And watched the sun go down, but never talked Much any more or told him what she saw; Except when once she said 'twas sort of fun To try to guess what colors there would be Along the mountains with the setting sun, On days the range was clear enough to see. He said it was a funny thing because Out there, as nearly as he could recall, The mountains were so far, there hardly was One day in five you could see them at all.
Learned men of the twentieth century, armed with large finite numbers and radiotelescopes as big as football fields to measure the pulse of light from stars beyond the range of human vision, conclude that this world, all we call nature, was once inside such a star. Heisenberg shrugs and says, &ldquo;I am not sure what an electron is, but it's something like a cloud of possibilities.&rdquo; Hildegard saw it plain, in the monastery at Rupertsberg, midway through her life, in 1140 or so: Eve as a cloud, leaf-green, shining, containing stars ...
What's all this hubbub and yelling,  Commotion and scamper of feet, With ear-splitting clatter of kettles and cans,  Wild laughter down Mafeking Street? O, those are the kids whom we fought for  (You might think they'd been scoffing our rum) With flags that they waved when we marched off to war  In the rapture of bugle and drum. Now they'll hang Kaiser Bill from a lamp-post,  Von Tirpitz they'll hang from a tree.... We've been promised a &lsquo;Land Fit for Heroes&rsquo;   What heroes we heroes must be! And the guns that we took from the Fritzes,  That we paid for with rivers of blood, Look, they're hauling them down to Old Battersea Bridge  Where they'll topple them, souse, in the mud! But there's old men and women in corners  With tears falling fast on their cheeks, There's the armless and legless and sightless   It's seldom that one of them speaks. And there's flappers gone drunk and indecent  Their skirts kilted up to the thigh, The constables lifting no hand in reproof  And the chaplain averting his eye.... When the days of rejoicing are over,  When the flags are stowed safely away, They will dream of another wild &lsquo;War to End Wars&rsquo;  And another wild Armistice day. But the boys who were killed in the trenches,  Who fought with no rage and no rant, We left them stretched out on their pallets of mud  Low down with the worm and the ant.
What most I wish to hear from you I heard. It was the silence in between the speaking, the golden silences that charged the word with correspondences I had been seeking in all vocables. But only your silences like the patient female dove disclosed the secret I had been looking for: language is the golden cage of our love. It is as though the heart, adoring silence but tortured by the ghouls of its existence, cried out howling in the night, or sang wildly of love in dreams of violence, or till its suffering, cracked at the final pang, out of the dead mouths of children rang.
Weeping, they spoke out of the sacred tree:  &lsquo;Dark and unloving powers Envying everything valuable that is ours  Determine human destiny.&rsquo; Smiling, they stroked the bird on my shoulder.  &lsquo;Bright bait,&rsquo; they cried, &lsquo;Virtue! Bringing down hammer and lightning upon the upholder.  The dove shall desert you.&rsquo; Sighing, they showed anguish in their breast:  &lsquo;Look! Look!&rsquo; they cried. &lsquo;The pain is eternal but the cause has died.  Who cares what is best!&rsquo; Waiting for peace a victim at my foot  Turned to stone with patience. The voices murmured: &lsquo;Bitter the bitter fruit  Of our supplications.&rsquo; Then out of the tongue-twisting tree spoke to me  Every human and animal: &lsquo;We ask our parental cause why we had to be.  Why do we live at all?&rsquo; &lsquo;Why do the bright-eyed algae fold the shore  Unloving in their embrace? O unrewarded servants of Time and Place,  Serve, serve no more.&rsquo; &lsquo;Shuddering the great star uncurls at its sex  In labour, but cannot give Back in the teeth of the universal multiplex  A stellar negative.&rsquo; &lsquo;O brute and hour, tooth and knife,  Condemned to live and suffer and never die, Pronounce the unholy Why.  Root out the assent at the source of life.&rsquo; Subsiding the weeping ceased in the sacred tree  As the leaves closed over And I saw the everlastingly restless body of humanity  Clasped in the sins of its lover.
As Eichmann said, the trains ran like a dream, my brother said in the city square and the stocks were harrumphing bulls on TV. Towards mountains of spectacles that had lost their eyes, gold teeth without faces, artificial limbs climbing by themselves all over the landscape, junk bonds lying in the graveyard of cars and caterpillars all along the train tracks. As Eichmann said, I obeyed orders, that's all, my brother said, and pensions crumbled as he herded people like himself into cattle cars, children like his own into ovens not unlike the ones in your kitchen, only larger, dying men making pyramids of tangled hands and feet, fingers in another's eye, towards the airhole, the chimney through which they went up in smoke. As Eichmann said, how can I talk about it now after all these years of not remembering and not forgetting either? That was then, now is now, my brother said.
Swans loom on the playground swooning in the basket air, the nod of their bills in open flight, open formation. Street-poisoned, a gray mallard skims into our courtyard with a bag: And he poisons them  And he poisons them  Electronic-nigger-recruiter, my pass is a blade near the sternum cutting in: you can make this a career. Patches itch on my chest and shoulders  I powder them with phisohex solution from an aerosol can: you can make this a career. Pickets of insulin dab the cloudy hallways in a spray. Circuits of change march to an honor guard  I am prancing: I am prancing: you can make this a career.
knowing her is not knowing her. is not autograph lines or souvenir signatures &amp; shared smiles, is not pulitzers, poet laureates or honorary degrees you seewe ordinary people just know ordinary people to read gwen is to be, to experience her in the  is the same, she is her words,more like a fixed part of the worldis there quietly penetratingslow reminds us of a willie kgositsile love poemor issac hayes singing  still she suggests more; have u ever seen her home? it's an idea of her: a brown wooden frame trimmed in dark gray with a new screen door. inside:looks like the lady owes everybody on the southside nothing but books momma's books. her home like her person is under-fed and small. gwen: pours smiles of african-rain a pleasure well received among uncollected garbage cans and heatless basement apartments. her voice the needle for new-songs plays unsolicited messages: poets, we've all seen poets. minor poets ruined by minor fame.
Lying here early, we smile at our love, At the calm day closing of night's great gulfs, At the sheets so dimpled and smug above The deep drowned bodies they do not think of: And who would now think that these waves were wolves, That last night your body beneath the sheets With its piston legs and serpent arms Was a treacherous sea, and cradled fleets Of great spice galleons through tropic heats  Sunk with their poppy and all their charms! Awake! Awake, young woman, in a mild air. There's a clinging and a soft rain like silk Outside our window. Sweet one spread your hair, Rough with sea salt, on a pillow where Your neck and shoulders are my morning milk. The geese and the turkeys are cackling now; The kitchen scudge is scrubbing at the pot; That deep sad yawning is a pensive cow; And we ourselves may wonder how Into this lucky land we ever got. With its beer that smacks of the sawdust floor And the hearty spit of the local types, And its eloquent lobsters that crawl ashore Begging the diner to ask for some more, And its tenpenny whiskeys that cheer the tripes! Country of open bowels and open hearts! Here steaks are red and raw like carter's fists! Potatoes, great and mealy; cream-drenched tarts! We eat, we drink, we sleep. By fits and starts We note a theme and how the theme persists.
Sun valves open blinds in schoolrooms under an alp and the stone academy in a city, sun levers help along each crack while teacher imprints a pig on penmanship, the error obvious because leads and erasers are out, only wet ink is permitted, it has got to be right before it hits the page, slotted in the grid millenially plowed to a field's edge and turning strictly. Small scaling to big, dead with the still-aborning, laws with outlaws, are true as an edge is true ... the sharer in all these is a squint-eye assessing other kinds of eyes for a coal burning sullenly hidden, solar glint on the Roman wrestler in rooms that Gottfried Keller gave his hero, its plaster smoldering then catching, igniting in him &ldquo;the golden ring of defense and attack&rdquo; after the others went off was it laughter dribbling back? the fatherly one having stuck a fist through his large page of inky abstract stuff and that was his coming-of-age the women giggling elsewhere so the fellow begins sketching all that musculature. And none of this is soon over.
If you were going to get a pet what kind of animal would you get. A soft bodied dog, a hen  feathers and fur to begin it again. When the sun goes down and it gets dark I saw an animal in a park. Bring it home, to give it to you. I have seen animals break in two. You were hoping for something soft and loyal and clean and wondrously careful  a form of otherwise vicious habit can have long ears and be called a rabbit. Dead. Died. Will die. Want. Morning, midnight. I asked you if you were going to get a pet what kind of animal would you get.
Ocean Springs Missippy you dont know about that unless youve died in magnolia tripped across the Gulf &amp; come alive again or fallen in the ocean lapping up light like the sun digging into the scruffy palm leaves fanning the almighty trains huffing it choo-choo straight up our street morning noon &amp; nighttrain squalling that moan like a big ass blues man smoking up the sunset Consider the little house of sunken wood in the dusty street where my father would cut his fingers up to his ankles in fragrant coils of lumber shavings the backyard of nowhere Consider Nazis &amp; crackers on the some stage splitting the bill Affix it all to my memory of Ma &amp; her love of bananas the light flashing in &amp; out of our lives lived 25&cent; at a time when pecans were in season or the crab &amp; shrimp was plentiful enough for the fishermen to give away for gumbo for o soft hullo if you as a woman had the sun in your voice the wind over your shoulder blowing the right way at just that moment in history
Bread, cheese, two apples. She sank her water bottle in Becka Brook, disturbing a fierce light. The granite carried a trace of pinkness like the blemish of the well-born: a naevus. Everything was hot to the touch. She worked her shoulder into the warp of the stone and closed her eyes, astonished to see him stepping out of the el of shadow between the baker's and the church. The ironwork on the church door sweltered and sang. The horse was chewing a broken rope of water.
On Stinson Beach, long spit of sand scything the sea, A clutter of beach homes and summer cottages Sprawls beneath the wind's pelt. A few shore pines and cypresses protect from the gales The love nests, the hippy pads and the homosexual lairs. And we, among them and of them, A fugitive monk and an unwed mother, Making love in the solstice weather, Thread time's needle eye, Clasp in a welter of conclusive rapture. Blow out of the Pacific, The vast waters beyond the Farralones, O wind of the solstice and the knuckle of the year. Within your arms I embrace the twin facts of love and death: Death of the past, the love Of future and the life, one rapture that abides. Under us the perdurable sand, That shifts and washes and remains forever, Gift of the sea, gift of the wind's Somber indirection, and the vane of time, Changing, changing on its hub, Spelling out of the socket of consequence Its terror and its truth.
No wonder the vampire Is dead From the hem of his Cloak to the roots of His fangs he is one big Dummy Doesn't he Know that creeping Through the open windows Of people's lives can Lead to his extinction? Carrying off peoples' Dear ones can get him stuck You can't even Stake the stud without Becoming caked in his Blood There is a vampire Who is cutting into My orderly progression In my profession He shadows me about the Country like an itinerant Snake Everything I do, It do He converts my Friends into his concoctions And convinces peasants that I am their devil He is putting ignorant Heat on me A wicked trick is dying For me to use it I can't hold out much longer Vampire In my sleep I hear you screaming Vamp Wise up Blood Sucker Or you will have the Dawn you hate
The Christmas tribe, in the big city, is forgiven; what they did, what people actually committed the crime, who is guilty, that is contained in the pardon, written in long-hand, before the Emancipation Proclamation, and the Sioux are unreconciled to events. They stand, each in his own deathsong, on the group platform for justice, every one guilty of being a Dakota, the sundance of retribution in the pen. &ldquo;Due Process&rdquo; is for 38 braves who are wasted on the knees and backbones of the citizens of New Elm; in the bakery in Mankato there is a powwow of forgiveness in the leavened bread, but no one remembers the 38 who were not guilty and Dakota still avoid Mankato in all seasons. It is said that the 38 eagles circling above the powwow were the grandfathers of the eagles  &ldquo;Now there are eagles on the ground.&rdquo; In &ldquo;Land of Memories&rdquo; Park the pipe ceremony honors the ancestors; the victors write their history on National Public Radio, though rites of legal protection are suspended, as the knots on the guillotine-platform one hundred twenty-five years ago in New Elm. There was &ldquo;no time for a defense&rdquo;; symbolic pardons are unofficial. At Hardee's the machine fast food are the new gallows of &ldquo;Sleepy Eye&rdquo; and &ldquo;Little Crow,&rdquo; nesting places for eagles that flew over the regional library when research was done. The sculptor made a limestone report for the village elders; they sing into existence the world where song belongs, songlines, aboriginal songs, a roadway of connections with the world of existence. No gallows can speak for eagles of the president's quill pen.
They are weighing the babies again on color television. They are hanging these small bags of bones up in canvas slings to determine which ones will receive the dried-milk mush, the concentrate made out of ground-up trash fish. For years we have watched them, back-lit by the desert, these miles of dusty hands holding out goatskins or cups, their animals dead or dying of rinderpest, and after the credits come up I continue to sit through  poacher big enough for a small brown baby, an Alaska salmon simmers in a court bouillon. For a first course, steak tartare to awaken the palate. With it Julia suggests a zinfandel. This scene has a polite, a touristy flavor to it, and I let it play. But somewhere Oxfam goes on spooning gluey gruel between the parched lips of potbellied children, the ones who perhaps can be saved from kwashiorkor an ancient Ghanaian word  though with probable lowered IQs, the voiceover explains, caused by protein deficiencies linked to the drought and the drought has grown worse with the gradual increase in herds overgrazing the thin forage grasses of the Sahel. This, says the voice, can be laid to the natural greed of the nomad deceived by technicians digging new wells which means (a slow pan of the sand) that the water table has dropped. And now to Julia's table is borne the resplendent fish. Always the camera is angled so that the guests look up. Among them I glimpse that sly Dean, Jonathan Swift. After the credits come up I continue to sit with those who are starving to death in a distant nation squatting, back-lit by the desert, hands out, in my head and the Dublin Dean squats there too, observing the population that waits for too little dried milk, white rice, trash fish. Always the camera is angled so they look up while their babies are weighed in slings on color television, look into our living rooms and the shaded rooms we sleep in.
IT CAN BE beautiful this sitting by oneself all alone except for the world, the very world a literal extension of living leaf, sur- face &amp; wave of light: the moon for example. American poet Hazel Hall felt, &ldquo;I am less myself &amp;more of the sun,&rdquo; which I think upon these cool common nights being at some remove, in spirit at least, from where they are busy building bombs &amp; preparing concen- tration camps to put my people into; I am still free to be in love with dust &amp; limbs (vegetable &amp; human) &amp; with lights in the skies of high spring. IN THE AFTERNOON you watch fishermen &amp; fisherboys in mended boats dragging their dark nets thru the waters. You can even buy a little packet of dried sardines like I do, a soda, &amp; lean against the rock &amp; iron railings but you wont be able to imagine the wanderings of my own mustachio'd dad who was a fisherman in Mississippi in the warm streams of the Gulf of Mexico. How time loops &amp; loops! Already I'm drunk with the thought of distances. I do that look skyward &amp; re-chart the con- stellations. No one to drop in on. No one to drop in on me. It's been a long time since I've had nothing better to do than estab- lish myself in one spot &amp; stare directly into the faces of the  moon, the golden orange white brown blue moon, &amp; listen to the tock of my heart slowing down in the silence. I can almost hear in the breeze &amp; picture in the sniffable award-winning  moonlight the doings &amp; dyings of my hard-working father, of all my heartbroken mamas &amp; dads.
If you, X, take this woman, Y, and if you, Y, take this man, X, you two who have taken each other many times before, then this may be something to trust, two separate folks not becoming halves, as younger people do, but becoming neither more nor less than yourselves, separate  this means a different kind of love, as it must, if it means different conveniences and inconveniences, as it must, then let this  from a friend act like grease for what may yet be difficult, undefined, and when the ordinary days of marriage stretch out like prairie, here's to the wisdom which understands that if the heart's right and the mind at ease with it the prairie is a livable place, a place for withstanding all kinds of weather, and here's to the little hills, the ones that take you by surprise, and the ones you'll need to invent.
It is scribbled along the body Impossible even to say a word An alphabet has been stored beneath the ground It is a practice alphabet, work of the hand Yet not, not marks inside a box For example, this is a mirror box Spinoza designed such a box and called it the Eighth Sky called it the Nevercadabra House as a joke Yet not, not so much a joke not Notes for Electronic Harp on a day free of sounds (but I meant to write &ldquo;clouds&rdquo;) At night these same boulevards fill with snow Lancers and dancers pass a poisoned syringe, as you wrote, writing of death in the snow, Patroclus and a Pharaoh on Rue Ravignan It is scribbled across each body Impossible even to name a word Look, you would say, how the sky falls at first gently, then not at all Two chemicals within the firefly are the cause, twin ships, twin nemeses preparing to metamorphose into an alphabet in stone
The man nurtures his hurt. But searching the past for the harsh word, The injurious act that turned her away, Will not find what he seeks. Nothing was done. His loss does not gather from what he is, But from what he is not. For no one is whole. Who in his being embodies all the aspects of mankind? The man, gazing into her eyes, Is unable to see the continents sunken behind her sight, The whole regions of being His limited presence can never disclose. She who declares: I will be true, Cannot govern her oath. Somewhere in the world moves one laden with power, Who one day may come and merely stand near, And the darkness will break, The subterranean ranges rise from their depths and be known, Guttering time down their sides, Spilling the waste and wreckage of the past, Its motives, its needs, its great pledges of faith. Against such a day the man has no wedge, Being then not enough. She will not wait, But will pack her small bag  All that she wants of his once world  Will pen her terse note, And will go.
Children, when I am ash read by the light of the fire that consumes me this document whose subject is love. I want to leave you everything: my life divided into so many parts there are enough to go around; the world from this window: weather and a tree which bequeaths all of its leaves each year. Today the lawyer plans for your descendants, telling a story of generations that seems to come true even as he speaks. My books will fill your children's shelves, my small enameled spoons invade their drawers. It is the only way I know, so far, to haunt. Let me be a guest at my own funeral and at the reading of my will. You I'll reward first for the moments of your births, those three brief instants when I understood my life. But wisdom bends as light does around the objects it touches. The only legacy you need was left by accident long ago: a secret in the genes. The rest is small change.
At Delphi I prayed to Apollo that he maintain in me the flame of the poem and I drank of the brackish spring there, dazed by the gong beat of the sun, mistaking it, as I shrank from the eagle's black shadow crossing that sky of cruel blue, for the Pierian Spring  and soon after vomited my moussaka and then my guts writhed for some hours with diarrhea until at dusk among the stones of the goatpaths breathing dust I questioned my faith, or within it wondered if the god mocked me. But since then, though it flickers or shrinks to a blue bead on the wick, there's that in me that burns and chills, blackening my heart with its soot, flaring in laughter, stinging my feet into a dance, so that I think sometimes not Apollo heard me but a different god.
The Muse in her dark habit, trim-waisted, wades into deep water. The spring where she will fill her pitcher to the brim wells out below the lakes surface, among papyrus, where a stream enters the lake and is crossed by the bridge on which I stand. She stoops to gently dip and deep enough. Her face resembles the face of the young actress who played Miss Annie Sullivan, she who spelled the word &ldquo;water&rdquo; into the palm of Helen Keller, opening the doors of the world. In the baroque park, transformed as I neared the water to Valentines, a place of origin, I stand on a bridge of one span and see this calm act, this gathering up of life, of spring water and the Muse gliding then in her barge without sails, without oars or motor, across the dark lake, and I know no interpretation of these mysteries although I know she is the Muse and that the humble tributary of Roding is one with Alpheus, the god who as a river flowed through the salt sea to his love's well so that my heart leaps in wonder. Cold, fresh, deep, I feel the word &lsquo;water&rsquo; spelled in my left palm.
The minor stupidities of my world dominate that world  as when with two bridges across  the river and one closed for repairs the other also will be closed by the authorities for painting! But then there is heaven and the ideal state closed also before the aspiring soul. I had rather watch a cat threading  a hedge with another sitting by while the bird screams overhead athrash in the cover of the low branches.
Sealights reflected on the rocks And sunlight baffled by the waves: O shores! what greens there are that waver in the shallows, What depths of being, invading blues, What shadows under waves! They sit like vast shadows on the rocks. They stand and are women on the sands. Their hands are sober on the rocks And in their eyes are myths conceived. These hands have dug, these loins have labored, These eyes have seen The man that leaned above them, hasty, They have known the hands that pushed their thighs apart. The ecstasy they have known and the burning, The heart against the heart The ecstasy they have known and the burden, The heart under the heart. Then the child's hand that gropes across the heart. But now they sit by the seas And are unmoved by the lisping sands Or by the losing splendor of the shelly moon. Our course, I think, is nearer to the sun. Over their eyelids, in ethereal bronze Deploy, Icarus! For among their rocks Are depths where a man might drown. What shall we do? We are their sons, Insane of courage, lost to will, Failing, not fathers to our sons  Serene, in the ears of the flesh, they hear The rude white-flashing rock-noise. Their seas have not the fret of fortune, In our appeasement is their peace. When they set out upon these sands It will be, huge feet, toward eternity. With the calm march of night they will go And toward the assuagement of goddesses. In what regions, by what shores, White marts and towers, By what margins of what noisier seas, Do I think thee to be, my country? After revolt, what triumph and what deaths?
This plot of ground facing the waters of this inlet is dedicated to the living presence of Emily Dickinson Wellcome  who was born in England; married; lost her husband and with her five year old son sailed for New York in a two-master; was driven to the Azores; ran adrift on Fire Island shoal, met her second husband in a Brooklyn boarding house, went with him to Puerto Rico bore three more children, lost her second husband, lived hard for eight years in St. Thomas, Puerto Rico, San Domingo, followed the oldest son to New York, lost her daughter, lost her &ldquo;baby,&rdquo; seized the two boys of the oldest son by the second marriage mothered them they being motherless fought for them against the other grandmother and the aunts, brought them here summer after summer, defended herself here against thieves, storms, sun, fire, against flies, against girls that came smelling about, against drought, against weeds, storm-tides, neighbors, weasels that stole her chickens, against the weakness of her own hands, against the growing strength of the boys, against wind, against the stones, against trespassers, against rents, against her own mind. She grubbed this earth with her own hands, domineered over this grass plot, blackguarded her oldest son into buying it, lived here fifteen years, attained a final loneliness and  If you can bring nothing to this place but your carcass, keep out.
That truce didn't last.   The dark school dropped its people on to the road Like dice cast   Loudly on a classroom desk lid Just   As silence starts.  We pull away to the hills, from where we see   Thunder, dawn, or sheer Emptiness unbolt the clouds, as the thing on high   Has its one idea: Catastrophe   Somewhere or here. The Devil bikes around, helping. He does!   The Devil is not powerful. He cannot Die. He steps on a mine, he stubs his toes.   Like hell they hurt But he bikes on. He goes   To a gunman  He tries   To free some hostages. He throws his arm Round homesick Irish, Spanish, Canadian UN guys   Who wake up in alarm Alone, in the cold sunrise.   He does no harm. He is spotted moving across   A no-man's-land while corporals scream  And bullets criss-cross   His mending heart, which can only ache Or endure loss,   And is black. We lose the Devil   During a siege, but he crops up now in a newsreel Trying with a Red Cross man to heave some rubble   Off a shop girl, But unable,   And unhopeful. The Devil we freeze in a frame   Is stepping back, too tired, Hands on his head. The Devil is doing the same   Every day, while the Lord Locks the gates of a camp, apportions blame,   Gives His Word.
Whatever the case is that is what there is You You have been raped &ldquo;Raped raped&rdquo; you cry &ldquo;So you've been raped&rdquo; we say and say &ldquo;How many times&rdquo; and &ldquo;What do you want now dearie cosmetic surgery repair of trauma Not a chance dear No ways&rdquo; Not even one of those convenient sages familiars of the yeatsian craft can tell you more than what the case is nor God Himself Who loves you spite of all can make what has been not to have been &ldquo;Catch 22&rdquo; was what Augustine said &ldquo;Rapaed you Roman matrons may have been nothing can undo that Vandal trick What matters is did you at last enjoy it discovering a pleasure in the pinch What charge then lies against your server in which you do not share assault and rape matched neatly by lust &ldquo;compounded with adultery&rdquo;
<> The flaunting rubbish in the grass; With folded arms across my face I shut the summer light away. On him too the old trick to play!  Too dull, too base! I see again his dream-worn hand Shaken by my poor praise, his brow Flushed by the words I scarce knew how To speak at all, so shadowy grand He stalked there in Song's lonely land,  Under the vow. So rare a spirit, and if frail  Curse thee! what should a spirit be That ate not, drank not, save for thee? Flat brothel-jestress, thing of sale, On his head too to pour the stale  Indignity!
This year we are sending you combs of honey from Jaynes Farm, only six hard miles west of the village where we live. I have run with my body that far. All summer I approached the apple trees burning their best green light that had now turned gold. We wish you the green-gone-to-gold running of joy. We wish you to remember the nights long and black heaving star glitter in the bees who ran on the hours of air, giving the gift of themselves in gold. We have wrapped this in local spruce that it may smell clean and stay good. We believe the wind sings us together. Tonight our family is standing in the yard, under the godly blue spruce, wearing the magical light of the star mantle. A long window light keeps our feet gold. If you were here you would stand with us to face Jaynes Farm where the bees wait to work and the apple trees shiver again and deer crane their necks upward, ghosts who cross and recross the human road. On your breads, when you come to eat, squeeze the comb between your good hands so the gold runs out and gleams. Do not consume the white husk or the green limbs, else you may feel the coming of hooves and the odd fanning of wings behind you. Beyond this we have to advise everyone there are gaping holes and you must squeeze hard to think of us, filling them.
This morning we can be kind to one another. A trophy carried through the labyrinth in the arms of a blind minotaur, you're wholly occupied by pastimes of invisibility.  (you smirked), taking the hand of difference, taken in by what the retina takes in. Sullen boy, sight sullies you; it's made you what you are. I prefer to watch you sleep, your face adorned by lack, your person sacrificed to first light slatted through matte blinds. I'm not ready to give that up just yet, the giving everything for what the eye can see, for nothing, not for free; I'm partial to the part of light that scribbles on your cheek. (Your sleep finds me stealing kisses from particulars, sight unseen: a parcel of you you can't keep I'll carry from your room, untouched by human hands.) The men you've rejected will be in the bushes tonight, searching for a shadow that looks like you. Sing them a lullaby to lead them out with your amazing voice, but don't wake up.
Civil Rights included Nathan and the rest of them, who got in america big shotting off the agony a class of blue Bloods, hip to the swing and sway of the usa. yeh all the 1st negroes world wide, joined knees, and shuffled heroically into congress, city hall, the anti-p program, and a thousand penetrable traps of cookstove america. a class of exploiters, in black face, collaborators, not puppets, pulling their own strings, and ours too, in the poor people's buck dance, w/o the bux. But see, then later, you talkin afrika, and its unity like a giant fist of iron, smashing &ldquo;racialism,&rdquo; around the world. But see that fist, any fist, reared back to strike an enemy, shd strike the real enemy. Not a colorless shadow for black militants in residence, to bloat the pockets and consolidate the power of an international bourgeoisie. In rag time, slanting stick legs, with a pocket full of toasted seaweed, and a bibliography of bitter neocapitalists or bohemian grays, celebrating life in a dark garage w/all cars banned until the voodoo car appear. The way the rich blackies showed after we marched and built their material base, now niggers are left in the middle of the panafrikan highway, babbling about eternal racism, and divine white supremacy a hundred thousand dollar a year oppression and now the intellectualization, the militant resource of the new class, its historical valorization. Between them, john johnson and elijah, david rockefeller rests his smiling head.
Dear Archie: I hope the boat trip home wasn't long but isn't any trip on the United States line? I'm trying a bomber crash poem and I'm working in short lines. I wish you were here to advise me on the timing. You time them well. I'm lost without that harsh, often too booming voice across the page. It snowed last night in the mountains and I consider that un-Italian. What a bust Italy was for you. Remember when someone asked you what you'd do in Rome, you said, walk along the Tiber and look at weeds. You should have come here. Phyllis speaks Italian and you'd have gotten along. The people here are honest and the setting Lord, the rise of stone mountains out of the sea and the sea clearer than gin. When it storms, the sea is blue milk and you can look at the little things, not just weeds but the old sepia prints of dead men ringed with flowers and the short silver fish they catch in the Mediterranean. Like Corson's Inlet, it says, I say, come. I hope Richard Howard accepts your invitation to spend time with you and Phyllis on the ocean. What good company he is, except he seldom is because he's always working. The only bad thing here is, I'm lonely. For three months I haven't spoken English to anyone, and my Italian gets by only because the Italians are  I'm wrapping up the book and going soon to London. I've sent Richard the poems and the table of contents and he says, that's it. What better guarantee? I'll take the train, like the man in one of my poems. I think I'll never see this again. But then I found it like we find all things, by lucky accident, sometimes not so lucky, and I'll carry it with me like a man carries a dream of curved giant women who say, come and beckon to us, come, and who are never there and never go away. Your Neapolitan Buddy. Dick.
Lift up your heads: in life, in death,  God knoweth his head was high. Quit we the coward's broken breath  Who watched a strong man die. If we must say, &lsquo;No more his peer  Cometh; the flag is furled.&rsquo; Stand not too near him, lest he hear  That slander on the world. The good green earth he loved and trod  Is still, with many a scar, Writ in the chronicles of God,  A giant-bearing star. He fell: but Britain's banner swings  Above his sunken crown. Black death shall have his toll of kings  Before that cross goes down. Once more shall move with mighty things  His house of ancient tale, Where kings whose hands were kissed of kings  Went in: and came out pale. O young ones of a darker day,  In art's wan colours clad, Whose very love and hate are grey   Whose very sin is sad, Pass on: one agony long-drawn  Was merrier than your mirth, When hand-in-hand came death and dawn,  And spring was on the earth.
In among the silver birches winding ways of tarmac wander  And the signs to Bussock Bottom, Tussock Wood and Windy Brake, Gabled lodges, tile-hung churches, catch the lights of our Lagonda  As we drive to Wendy's party, lemon curd and Christmas cake.   Rich the makes of motor whirring,   Past the pine-plantation purring    Come up, Hupmobile, Delage!   Short the way your chauffeurs travel,   Crunching over private gravel    Each from out his warm gar&aacute;ge. Oh but Wendy, when the carpet yielded to my indoor pumps   There you stood, your gold hair streaming,   Handsome in the hall-light gleaming There you looked and there you led me off into the game of clumps   Then the new Victrola playing   And your funny uncle saying &lsquo;Choose your partners for a fox-trot! Dance until its    &ldquo;Come on, young 'uns, foot it featly!&rdquo;   Was it chance that paired us neatly,   I, who loved you so completely, You, who pressed me closely to you, hard against your party frock?&rdquo; &ldquo;Meet me when you've finished eating!&rdquo; So we met and no one found us.  Oh that dark and furry cupboard while the rest played hide and seek! Holding hands our two hearts beating in the bedroom silence round us,  Holding hands and hardly hearing sudden footstep, thud and shriek.   Love that lay too deep for kissing    &ldquo;Where     Love so pure it    Love so strong that I was frighten'd   When you gripped my fingers tight and Hugging, whispered &ldquo;I'm your friend.&rdquo; Goodbye Wendy! Send the fairies, pinewood elf and larch tree gnome,   Spingle-spangled stars are peeping   At the lush Lagonda creeping Down the winding ways of tarmac to the leaded lights of home.   There, among the silver birches,   All the bells of all the churches Sounded in the bath-waste running out into the frosty air.   Wendy speeded my undressing,   Wendy is the sheet's caressing   Wendy bending gives a blessing, Holds me as I drift to dreamland, safe inside my slumber-wear.
When roads are mired with ice and snow, And the air of morn is crisp with rime; When the holly hangs by the mistletoe, And bells ring in the Christmas-time:  It's Saddle, my Heart! and ride away To the sweet-faced girl with eyes of gray! Who waits with a smile for the gifts you bring  A man's strong love and a wedding-ring   It's Saddle, my Heart, and ride! When vanes veer north and storm-winds blow, And the sun at noon is a blur o'erhead; When the holly hangs by the mistletoe, And the Christmas service is sung and said:  It's Come, O my Heart, and wait a while, Where the organ peals, in the altar aisle, For the gifts that the church now gives to you  A woman's hand and a heart that's true.  It's Come, O my Heart, and wait! When rooms gleam warm with the fire's glow, And the sleet raps sharp on the window-pane: When the holly hangs by the mistletoe, And Christmas revels begin again:  It's Home, O my Heart, and love, at last! And her happy breast to your own held fast: A song to sing and a tale to tell, A good-night kiss and all is well.  It's Home, O my Heart, and love!
A swollen infant under a tree, rose petals Stuck to his cheeks, heavy plaster eyelids Clucking like false teeth in disbelief ... He was abandoned here by his mother Who is a student of the East. At sunrise she thought the reflected Arches of the bridge over the water Were the brass-knuckles of the Turkish Police. She knew the shaded riverbank was a street For the serene bourgeoisie: And the strolling painter And the baby, who are One and the same, openly Look toward us Rather than to each other Which would complete the painting. The mother is now huddled in a yellow shack In the middle of vineyards. Her spoon in the candle flame blackens. There's the last of the powder On a square of paper And a hose tourniquet the color of skin. What she sees, unlikely muse Inspiring mystery, is not the throne room Of some sad Byzantine, but the metal bitch camel of King Artabanus: The automaton would spit and kick, was musical Beyond comprehension, And its right front hoof, studded with rubies, Was used by the King to crush the skulls Of family members who proved uninteresting. Old Artabanus had a large ascending throne, An elevator of gold flanked by palms. It rose to a lapis dome Which was eventually painted in the blood Of another king's messenger-son Who thought to promote a peace, Equal to childhood, throughout the kingdoms of the East.
The train. A hot July. On either hand Our sober, fruitful, unemphatic land, This Cambridge country plain beneath the sky Where I was born, and grew, and hope to die. Look! where the willows hide a rushy pool, And the old horse goes squelching down to cool, One angler's rod against their silvery green, Still seen today as once by Bewick seen. A cottage there, thatched sadly, like its earth, Where crimson ramblers make a shortlived mirth; Here, only flies the flick-tail cows disturb Among the shaven meads and willow-herb. There, rounded hay-ricks solemn in the yard, Barns gravely, puritanically tarred, Next heavy elms that guard the ripening grain And fields, and elms, and corn, and fields again. Over the soft savannahs of the corn, Like ships the hot white butterflies are borne, While clouds pass slowly on the flower-blue dome Like spirits in a vast and peaceful home. Over the Dyke I watch their shadows flow As the Icenian watched them long ago; So let me in this Cambridge calm July Fruitfully live and undistinguished die.
ah, so, yes that's where things leave you, full of abstractions animality chordatsm vertobrodoty mammaly primetcy &point;&point;&point; &point;&point;&point; mer can jdeo crt ny c
Even being able to get a glimpse of moon in a sky tacked up over West 22nd Street that I didnt know existed in New York is motive enough for celebration What do I do next, is it proper to smile? Is it bad city form to whistle &amp; jangle gently as you walk (like Satchel Paige says) to keep the juices flowing, to avoid running at all times? Ive almost never looked back on myself in this city designed so much for the moment that even the pain of peeking out the window at 2 A.M. to check out a modishly pantsuited, fortyish woman swearing &amp; crying, bumping into parked cars, screaming up at the window of a lover she almost got together with in the bar around the corner is only instant Off-B'way
The angel of death flies low over my father's bed. Only my mother sees. She and my father are alone in the room. She bends over him to touch his hand, his forehead. She is so used to mothering that now she strokes his body as she would the other children's, first gently, then inured to suffering. Nothing is any different. Even the spot on the lung was always there. My father has forgotten me in the excitement of dying. Like a child who will not eat, he takes no notice of anything. I sit at the edge of his bed while the living circle us like so many tree stumps. Once, for the smallest fraction of an instant, I thought he was alive in the present again; then he looked at me as a blind man stares straight into the sun, since whatever it could do to him is done already. Then his flushed face turned away from the contract. I'm going to live without you as I learned once to live without my mother. You think I don't remember that? I've spent my whole life trying to remember. Now, after so much solitude, death doesn't frighten me, not yours, not mine either. And those words,  have no power over me. I know intense love always leads to mourning. For once, your body doesn't frighten me. From time to time, I run my hand over your face lightly, like a dustcloth. What can shock me now? I feel no coldness that can't be explained. Against your cheek, my hand is warm and full of tenderness.
We were remembering old times (that was twenty years ago) and you said you could recall only one time when you became really angry with mewe were staying then at the Chelsea on 23rd St (where Dylan Thomas had lived and Virgil Thomson)we had a funny-shaped room that smelled of dust because the black maid only vacuumed twice a month that night you were tired and I was too insistentI wouldn't let you get to sleepyou used a crude British expression and I sulkedbut the next morning before you awakened I went out to the corner and bought you a tiny pot of African violets when you woke I knelt at the bedside to present my contrition we laughed and laughed and you gave my ear a gentle little bite.
They saw rivers flow west and hoped again. Virginia speeding to another sea! 1671 Thomes Batts, Robert Fallam, Thomas Wood, the Indian Perecute, and an unnamed indentured English servant followed the forest past blazed trees, pillars of God, were the first whites emergent from the east. They left a record to our heritage, breaking of records. Hoped now for the sea, <> <> <> <> Coming where this road comes, flat stones spilled water which the still pools fed. Kanawha Falls, the rapids of the mind, fast waters spilling west. Found Indian fields, standing low cornstalks left, learned three Mohetons planted them; found-land farmland, the planted home, discovered! War-born: The battle at Point Pleasant, Cornstalk's tribes, last stand, Fort Henry, a revolution won; the granite SITE OF THE precursor EXECUTION sabres, apostles OF JOHN BROWN LEADER OF THE War's brilliant cloudy RAID AT HARPERS FERRY. Floods, heavy wind this spring, the beaten land blown high by wind, fought wars, forming a state, a surf, frontier defines two fighting halves, two hundred battles in the four years:troops here in Gauley Bridge, Union headquarters, lines bring in the military telegraph. Wires over the gash of gorge and height of pine. But it was always the water the power flying deep green rivers cut the rock rapids boiled down, a scene of power. Done by the dead. Discovery learned it. And the living? Live country filling west, knotted the glassy rivers; like valleys, opening mines, coming to life.
After so many wars and worn-out cities I grew sick of spilt blood, of angry mobs, mass graves, death camps, endless slaughter ... with my last strength I flew south to live among these crumbling Edwardian villas, fat abbatoirs and muddy hills. Old Igor loves it here ... my kauri coffin's kept waxed and polished; my dinner-suit's darned to the last black thread. Both are useless now ... one, a reminder of a grim mortality I'm too fat to fit; the other, of decadent nights when I danced in crimson bordellos with naked brides, nuzzling their creamy breasts. We still cling to bad habits when Igor limps at dusk along these wooden floors to whisper ... &lsquo;It begins!&rsquo; Faint stirrings trickle down my back. I flap work sleeves like useless wings. In the bedroom mirror some toothless stranger sips his midnight milk, and grins. When memories burn with former pleasures (that sweet ache for a lost baroque) I cool old lusts in jade-green waters under scarlet blossoms that look like blood. I bathe naked, letting salt and sand scour me back to some simpler being. Even Igor breathes deeper, strolling empty beaches resplendent in his cloak and gloves. All night his violin sobs across dark paddocks like a lost child scared of the moon's huge grin or the ocean's endless roar that shakes the porcelain on my coffin-lid. It's our table now, topped with vases of &lsquo;naked ladies&rsquo; and mushrooms heaped in rimu bowls like soft white skulls. Guilt ... guilt ... I cringe at the ancient horrors my past brings with it. Yet I sense the same ills in this silent bush. Man has been here some years before me burning roofs and bayoneting flesh. Smoke from the chimneys of the local cannery brings back fears I'd hoped were crushed. So much for &lsquo;new beginnings&rsquo;. I'm haunted by the ghosts of our century steaming in with their leather luggage, artillery, causes, borders changing again and again ... Memory trembles with sad occasions, with crowded wharfs and wayside stations where the numberless dead wander lost between trains ... We sit in the sun outside Ron the Poms as nubile joggers go bouncing past without so much as a downwards glance at two old codgers, minus hair and teeth, reading TRUTH and drinking their vodkas neat.
in greatest anarchy i decided to make a statement like a hill makes a statement to a clump of clover &ldquo;hold on tight i'm slumping in the middle and we can reach the bottom together can lie easy have no fear of inclination&rdquo; and i threw back my head breaking the wind's indignation (the wind has etiquette of her own she likes to carry what she may she has no time for others) and i carefully trimmed my mouth made ready to spill a pronouncement it would be simple would not complicate things i love simplicity it does not require more than possession of one's senses a bird a church a weed these are easy things can be thought of easily even when one has no government and now my lawless Self will decree: i have heavy thoughts now am loaded with murmurs of restless clover tired of clinging to moving earth tired of denied stillness and concepts of the wind reforming changing its mores to fit the larger scale of things and my anarchy has brought me back to limitation i need rules like them a bird a church a weed a thought.
The clouds are pushing in grey reluctance slowly northward to you,  While north of them all, at the farthest ends, stands one bright-   bosomed, aglance With fire as it guards the wild north-coasts, red-fire seas running   through  The rocks where ravens flying to windward melt as a well-shot   lance. You should be out by the orchard, where violets secretly darken   the earth,  Or there in the woods of the twilight, with northern wind-flowers   shaken astir. Think of me here in the library, trying and trying a song that is   worth  Tears and swords to my heart, arrows no armour will turn or   deter. You tell me the lambs have come, they lie like daisies white in   the grass  Of the dark-green hills; new calves in shed; peewits turn after   the plough  It is well for you. For me the navvies work in the road where I pass  And I want to smite in anger the barren rock of each waterless   brow. Like the sough of a wind that is caught up high in the mesh of   the budding trees,  A sudden car goes sweeping past, and I strain my soul to hear The voice of the furtive triumphant engine as it rushes past like   a breeze,  To hear on its mocking triumphance unwitting the after-echo   of fear.
<>  The farm dreams lonely on the hill: From early eve to early dawn  A cry goes with the whippoorwill  &ldquo;The old remain, the young are gone.&rdquo; Where run the roads they wander on?  The young, whose hearts romped shouting here: Whose feet thrilled rapture through this lawn,  Where sadness walks now all the year.  The old remain, the young are gone. To what far glory are they drawn?  And do they weary of the quest? And serve they now a king or pawn  There in the cities of unrest?  The old remain, the young are gone. They found the life here gray and wan,  Too kind, too poor, too full of peace: The great mad world of brain and brawn  Called to their young hearts without cease.  The old remain, the young are gone. They left us to our Avalon,  The ancient fields, the house and trees, Where we at sunset and at dawn  May sit with dreams and memories.  The old remain, the young are gone. Dear Heart, draw near and lean upon  My heart, and gaze no more through tears: We have our love; our work well done,  To help us face the wistful years.  The old remain, the young are gone.
Barricades hammered into place, the beams stake out in broad daylight to avert nothing they've taken; the old second floor where they write the checks, synchronize the grades, or type in correct places a stream data prognosis is taken in the night; the magpies are around, around the corporate desk. The blacks are studying the records kept, memorizing the numbers, tallying the secret exits, remembering the names, the window pipes, outside, for the way down. They've gotten up there with Frederick Douglass in a six-hour duel with the overseers, the first confrontation to his own man; Du Bois in Atlanta looking at the fingers toes of meat market Sam; and Malcolm in his first act crumbling his prison and the bullet proof glass. Someone is having a familiar vision of the black-white syndrome in the academic halls; in the cigar smoke one hears the full-bull rhesis rhetoric and the black Christmas in the halls of ivy: the barricades come down
What she wanted was to return to the original rainforest hear water pushing through the sapwood and leaves eating light as she wanted to eat light. She knew her nature was to be water, not wood. She knew there was a grove of vertical rivers of roaring waterfall-trees, and a grove of whirlpool-trees with vortices she could dive through, past the hollow years of her life right back to the roots.
&lsquo;Capitalism ,&rsquo; I started, but the barman hopped out of a pipkin. &lsquo;Capitalism,&rsquo; he countered, &lsquo;that's a flat and frothless word. I'm a good labourman, but if I mentioned capitalism My client&egrave;le would chew off their own ears And spit them down the barmaid's publicised cleavage.&rsquo; &lsquo;All right,&rsquo; I obliged, &lsquo;don't call it capitalism, Let's call it Mattiboko the Mighty.&rsquo; &lsquo;Exploitation ,&rsquo; I typed, but the Editor appeared unto me, A spike in one hand, a fiery pound note in the other. &lsquo;I'm a good liberal, but you're going out on a lamb  You don't catch Burnem Levin writing about exploitation  A million readers would gouge their eyes out, Think of that, like two million pickled onions in the cornflakes.&rsquo; &lsquo;Hold the back page,&rsquo; I surlied, &lsquo;sod exploitation, I'll retitle it The Massimataxis Incorporated Supplement.&rsquo; &lsquo;Oppression and mass-murder ,&rsquo; I opined straight into the camera. &lsquo;Cut!&rsquo; yelled the director, cutting off his head with a clapperboard. &lsquo;I'm a good fascist, but if you use that language Half your viewers are going to Tear the lids off their TV sets, Climb inside, pour Horlicks over their heads And die of calculated combustion. Too late now to balance the programme With a heartsofoak panel of our special experts Who are all oppressors and mass-murderers.&rsquo; &lsquo;You know the market,&rsquo; I wizened, &lsquo;Oppression and mass-murder are out this year  I'll christen them Gumbo Jumbo the Homely Obblestrog Spectacular.&rsquo; This was my fearless statement: The Horror World can only be changed by the destruction of Mattiboko the Mighty, The Massimataxis Incorporated Supplement And Gumbo Jumbo the Homely Obblestrog Spectacular. Audience reaction was quite encouraging.
<> The flower beneath thy lattice low  Then wouldst thou cull me, sweet, and wear A captive in thy slumberous hair,  Thy hair? Sing to me how I yearn to shine Yon pearly star above yon pine Thou gazest on I, of the skies, Should thus be taken to thine eyes,  Thine eyes? Sing to me how I'd be the breeze Which dips the dandelioned leas Thy footsteps find I, of the south, Might live a kiss upon thy mouth,  Thy mouth? Sing to me how my heart doth long To be the burden of some song Thou lovest; so myself might be The melody of memory  To thee.
Praise him for the place he picked. He shot himself dead in full sight of the red Irish lord and the rare albino sea perch. They nosed the glass and cried to the outside world of air &ldquo;he's bleeding&rdquo; in some salt water tongue. The flounder dozed on. The octopus flashed one disapproving eye at the cop. The cop found no suicide note. The cop found no I.D. The gun could not be traced. They questioned everyone there but the fish who swam around those being questioned. You'd have wanted to film it, the visitors with no answers shaken and sad, the red snapper behind them gasping, the misfit rock cod proud of his bad looks and the yellow shiners turning and turning like beautiful words going nowhere. What a beautiful picture. A year later the case was filed unsolved. And you? Me? Where should we die given a choice? In a hothouse? Along a remote seldom traveled dirt road? Isn't some part of that unidentified man in us all and wants to die where we started? Don't we share way back a cold green past and wouldn't we welcome dying unknown, unnamed on the floor of the ocean, our bones ignored by the only clock there, that slow unrhythmic waver of kelp  our bones giving off the phosphorus that collects in pockets and waits, then one night washes in glowing? And lovers, lovers would stop making love and stand there, each suddenly alone amazed at that gleam riding sand.
one April dusk the sallow street-lamps were turning snowy against a west of robin's egg blue when i entered a mad street whose mouth dripped with slavver of spring chased two flights of squirrel-stairs into a mid-victorian attic which is known as &Ogr; &Pgr;&Agr;&Rgr;&THgr;&Egr;&Ngr;&OHgr;&Ngr; and having ordered yaoorti from Nicho' settled my feet on the ceiling inhaling six divine inches of Hareminain the thick of the snick- er of cards and smack of back- gammon boards i was aware of an entirely dirty circle of habitu&eacute;s their faces like cigarettebutts, chewed with disdain,led by a Jumpy Tramp who played each card as if it were a thunderbolt red- hotpeeling off huge slabs of a fuzzy language with the aid of an exclamatory tooth-pick And who may that be i said exhaling into eternity as Nicho' laid before me bread more downy than street-lamps upon an almostclean plate &ldquo;Achilles&rdquo; said Nicho' &ldquo;and did you perhaps wish also shishkabob?&rdquo;
in the locked room what cannot happen happens again shaped to the size of a keyhole death comes reassuring choosing someone no one will miss now everything becomes a clue the moon has left footprints all over the rug the tree outside the window hides behind its false beard of leaves who did what precisely when slyly the clock stops the blood smells of ink the revolver shows its pearl handle at the end the facts click into place comfortably as knitting each answer marries its proper question even the skull smiles to itself as the detective tells how the moon was pure all along the tree was merely a tree and only I have no alibi at all
Everything speaks to me!In faith my sight is sound.I draw from out the resounding mountain side the gist of majesty.It is at once a presentation out of space awakening a spiritual enormity, and still, the sounding of a tone apart from any commitment to some scale. The sea comes in on rolling surfs of an insistent meaning,pounds the sands relentlessly,demanding a hearing.I overhear tides of myself all night in it. And in the sounds that lips and tongue and tunings of the vocal chords within the chamber of the mouth and throat can send upon the air, I answer.It is my evocation of the sound I'd have return to me.My world in speech answers some ultimate need I know, aroused, pours forth upon the sands again and again lines written for the audience of the sea. Then what is &ldquo;listening&rdquo;?The ear imitates another listening in its inner labyrinth  sound's alembic  here, the equilibrations enter in.Here, the &ldquo;up&rdquo; and &ldquo;down&rdquo; we know, so that tones are &ldquo;high&rdquo; and &ldquo;low&rdquo;, and words have weight in my hand as I write.The argument is in the balance, there where the tympanum translates waves of the airinvisible into resoundingvisibilities. The shores of the continent eroded listening to the sea.
You came day by day by day with the light of the world Deep caller you happen in flower and water You are more than this white head I press like a flower-bunch in my hands day after day None you resemble ever since I love you Allow me to lay you down among yellow garlands Who writes your name in letters of smoke mid southern  stars Ah May I call you back as you were then even if you did  not exist Sudden howls the wind and beats on my closed window The sky is a curdled net of somber fish Here all the winds come to perform all of them Disrobes the rain Pass fleeing the birds The wind The wind Alone I can struggle against the might of men Storm raises dark leaves whirling and loosens all the boats tied last night to the sky You are here Ah Do not you steal away You will match me to the last scream Curl up near me as if you were afraid Yet once an alien shadow raced through your eyes Now Now too Mite to me you bring woodbine and even your bosoms smell of it While the galloping sad winds kill butterflies-flowerbirds I love you and my joy bites soft fruit your mouth How it has ached you to become used to me to my soul apart unkempt to my name that clears the floor So many times have we seen a flame the daystar kissing  our eyes and overhead the half-light untwist its gyring fans My words stream down caressing you I have loved this long time you sun-used pearly form Until you I believe own all that exists From the hills I shall bring you joy-flowers bluebells hazels with shadows and baskets of kisses from the woods I would do with you what the springtime does with cherry trees
Just as the will to power From youth exhausted spins To earth, it sees a flower Rooted in ruins. From that remaking hour Perception begins. This for which I care, By the crowd denied, Holds a truth so clear, By none identified. I would expound it here, But my tongue is tied. Dearest things are so: Neglected, they stay; Applauded, they go. The river runs away And we check its flow Only when we play. Strange, that in all we make A solemn purpose can, More than most things, break, While some lesser plan By accident will wake The deepest roots in man.
The gleam of thy drenched floors of leaf-layers! Fragrance of death and change! If there is only now to live, I'll live the hour till doomstroke crouched with the russet toad, my huge human size no more account than a bough fallen: not upward, searching for branch-hidden sky: I'll look down into paradise. Thy moss gardens, the deep constellations of green, the striate rock furred with emerald, inscribed with gold lichen, with scarlet! Thy smooth acorns in roughsurfaced precise cups! Thy black horns of plenty!
I floated on a cloud one day, An amber cloud, whose rhythmic sway Held all my senses in a dream. I saw the trembling vesper stars Clinging and peeping through the bars Of purple-gold and pearly gleam. 'Mid silver spaces caught in air, Floating upon the cloudlets fair, While swinging were the rhythmic cars, Soft rapture did my senses greet, A music tremulously sweet,  The harmony beyond the stars. Suspended in the ether there, My spirit uttered voiceless prayer To the great Being of the Light. As darkness came star-vistas oped, My soul that erst in shadows groped, Rose tranquilly from height to height.
Unknown to me is the moment when I passed through life's lion-carved gateway into this world's magnificent mansion. What power was it that opened me in this immense mystery's lap like a bud in a vast forest in the middle of the night? Yet when, in the morning, I lifted my head high, opened my eyes and looked upon this earth, arrayed in blue cloth spangled with golden rays, and saw this world's ways, studded with pleasures and pains, in an instant did this unknown, unbounded mystery seem as entirely familiar as my mother's breast, very much mine. Unmanifest, beyond cognition, this awesome power has, to my eyes, assumed the shape of a mother.
<> The head of a green valley that I know, Spread the fair gardens and ancestral grounds Of Bellinglise, the beautiful ch&acirc;teau. Through shady groves and fields of unmown grass, It was my joy to come at dusk and see, Filling a little pond's untroubled glass, Its antique towers and mouldering masonry. Oh, should I fall to-morrow, lay me here, That o'er my tomb, with each reviving year, Wood-flowers may blossom and the wood-doves croon; And lovers by that unrecorded place, Passing, may pause, and cling a little space, Close-bosomed, at the rising of the moon. Here, where in happier times the huntsman's horn Echoing from far made sweet midsummer eves, Now serried cannon thunder night and morn, Tearing with iron the greenwood's tender leaves. Yet has sweet Spring no particle withdrawn Of her old bounty; still the song-birds hail, Even through our fusillade, delightful Dawn; Even in our wire bloom lilies of the vale. You who love flowers, take these; their fragile bells Have trembled with the shock of volleyed shells, And in black nights when stealthy foes advance They have been lit by the pale rockets' glow That o'er scarred fields and ancient towns laid low Trace in white fire the brave frontiers of France.
The moving of stones, that sly jockeying thrust takes place at night underground, shoulders first. They bud in their bunkers like hydras. They puff up head after head and allow them to drop off on their own making quahogs, cow flops, eggs and knee caps. In this way one stone can infuse a colony. Eyeless and unsurprised they behave in the manner of stones: swallow turnips, heave graves rise up openmouthed into walls and from time to time imitate oysters or mushrooms. The doors of my house are held open by stones and to see the tame herd of them hump their backbones as cumbrous as bears across the pasture in an allday rain is to believe for an afternoon of objects that waver and blur in some dark obedient order.
Our brains ache, in the merciless iced cast winds that knive us... Wearied we keep awake because the night is silent ... Low, drooping flares confuse our memory of the salient... Worried by silence, sentries whisper, curious, nervous,   But nothing happens. Watching, we hear the mad gusts tugging on the wire, Like twitching agonies of men among its brambles. Northward, incessantly, the flickering gunnery rumbles, Far off, like a dull rumour of some other war.   What are we doing here? The poignant misery of dawn begins to grow ... We only know war lasts, rain soaks, and clouds sag stormy. Dawn massing in the east her melancholy army Attacks once more in ranks on shivering ranks of grey,   But nothing happens. Sudden successive flights of bullets streak the silence. Less deathly than the air that shudders black with snow, With sidelong flowing flakes that flock, pause, and renew; We watch them wandering up and down the wind's nonchalance,   But nothing happens. Pale flakes with fingering stealth come feeling for our faces   We cringe in holes, back on forgotten dreams, and stare, snow-dazed, Deep into grassier ditches. So we drowse, sun-dozed, Littered with blossoms trickling where the blackbird fusses,    Is it that we are dying? Slowly our ghosts drag home: glimpsing the sunk fires, glozed With crusted dark-red jewels; crickets jingle there; For hours the innocent mice rejoice: the house is theirs; Shutters and doors, all closed: on us the doors are closed,    We turn back to our dying. Since we believe not otherwise can kind fires burn; Nor ever suns smile true on child, or field, or fruit. For God's invincible spring our love is made afraid; Therefore, not loath, we lie out here; therefore were born,   For love of God seems dying. Tonight, this frost will fasten on this mud and us, Shrivelling many hands, puckering foreheads crisp. The burying-party, picks and shovels in shaking grasp, Pause over half-known faces. All their eyes are ice,   But nothing happens.
Fellow down the street (it's like flocculation) throws a party and Cadillacs (and a Mark Continental or so) assemble lining all eight sides of the crossing he corners on as if an old Cadillac had died or two young were marrying: other places you see half-shamed, sullenly-arrogant foreign cars hugging into clusters or, other places, mixed bags like university peoples'
The night mist leaves us yearning for a new location to things impossibly stationary, the way they'd once float houses made from dismantled ships, brass and timber, from Plymouth, Massachusetts, across the sound to White Horse Beach. You were only a boy. Years later, gazing out to the red buoys of the harbor, you sought those houses, each the location of your childhood's end. Jon, I make this all sound too complex. Our view of time is stationary, a long prediction of remorse. We're drinking in timber, camping above Tucson, Arizona. Below, the houses are vague points of light, describing a grief you've housed since watching those buildings careen on water, a boy too sullen for your father. So the aspens creak like timber in an aging sloop. The others sleep. You locate the figure of your son, small and stationary, but tell me he'll die young, body unsound, a childhood diabetic. The bourbon makes you sound entranced to think one day you'll return to the house to find that you've outlived him, maybe the radio station playing some popular song. Outliving the boy, you'll outlive yourself. Drunk, we've lost our location. I shine my flashlight to find the others. The timbre of your voice grows slack. Leaves and timber rustle in the promise of rain, in the sound of distant thunder that, like death, has no location. Below, relentless clouds will cover houses. The campfire sputters, then grows, buoyed by the wind, our bodies the only things stationary. Because of death, our small, unstationary lives become narration a child is lost in timber in a fable when night approaches. The boy can't even see his hands. Only owl-cry, the sound of his heart. But soon the aspens part, the houses of his village appear, their location precise and consoling. He's stationary, not a sound from below. Beyond the timber, floating houses. And there his papa's lantern, a light the boy, can locate.
<> Across the porphyry floor A dancing-girl, Whose naked feet were red With lac, as though they bled, Came forth to whirl. Like two vermilion birds, More softly than soft words, Silent and fleet, Across the polished stone Amid the dance were blown Her naked feet. She strewed her path with showers Of saffron-petalled flowers, Whereof the scent Scattered upon the air A fragrance, everywhere The dancer went. As when a wind-burst blows The petals of a rose Across the grass, With footsteps light and swift So did the dancer drift And swirl and pass. With purple, green and red The porphyry where she sped Was bright and smooth (More velvety, more bright Those flowers of delight, Her feet, in sooth!) The cymbals rang no more. She drooped upon the floor And loosed the flowers, And all her perfumed hair Fell down around her there In dusky showers. As though a rose had bled Her little feet were red And bright as dawn. Across the porphyry floor She fluttered to the door And lo! ... was gone!
Each time I look up from the board to the rusty vineyards I can see, through mist like grains of finest pollen large dogs being walked, straining against their collars. Higher up in the Jura, a light snow,  they say here, sifts down on rounded humps of hills. The chic white lacquered table we sit around, three generations, smells of newness still. It came in parts, like a child's intricate toy. Assembling it was an hour's play ... In my mind I've landed on Boardwalk again and cannot pay, the Bank is cheating me blind, it&thorn;s the late thirties. Too young to do sums, I am almost always in tears. My brothers, two cousins and I, unaware we are sent here each summer out of filial duty squabble over St. James Place and the Short Line in our grandmother's fusty Atlantic Avenue flat. From Oma's front room overlooking the Boardwalk we can hear the surf break and sigh sucking back but we're unaware of the irony of place: cheap haven for the Depression's pensioners. To us Atlantic City is paradise except when it rains like this, except when we hear Oma's foreign words that speak pain and terror. We buck up to decide whose turn to roll the dice on the massive bleached oak table scrubbed with lemon its six carved legs ending in jungly claws ... My grandson's in Jail. He has failed three times to throw releasing doubles. He has failed to pass Go, lost two hundred dollars, and then having paid his fine, lands on Luxury Tax. His lower lip trembles, this luxury of a child who burst naked into our lives, like luck. Our sole inheritor, he has taken us over with his oceanic wants, his several passports. I will deed him the Reading Railroad, the Water Works, the Electric Company, my hotel on Park Place. All that I have is his, under separate cover and we are the mortgaged nub of all that he has. Soon enough he will learn, buying long, selling short his ultimate task is to stay to usher us out.
The rent man knocked. He said, Howdy-do? I said, What Can I do for you? He said, You know Your rent is due. I said, Listen, Before I'd pay I'd go to Hades And rot away! The sink is broke, The water don't run, And you ain't done a thing You promised to've done. Back window's cracked, Kitchen floor squeaks, There's rats in the cellar, And the attic leaks. He said, Madam, It's not up to me. I'm just the agent, Don't you see? I said, Naturally, You pass the buck. If it's money you want You're out of luck. He said, Madam, I ain't pleased! I said, Neither am I. So we agrees!
<> Though from the shadowed east the round moon still Climbs to the sky above the curving brow That marks the summit of a timeless hill. Though in the starred cold sky the silver drift Streams to the islands and the silvered sea, Not to her loveliness men's eyes will lift In some enchantment of a memory. Endymion, across the world tonight The great dark fatal birds you did not know Will lift their wide and moveless wings in flight, Heavy with death for men who wait below. Sleep, shepherd, sleep, within your memoried light: The moon will guide the bombers as they go.
A husky red-faced young fellow pushed his way through the crowded subway train selling Father Coughlin's &ldquo;Social Justice,&rdquo; and a man with a thin face, reading a thick book, leaned forward to shout, &ldquo;You dirty Fascist! Coughlin is a Fascist!&rdquo; The young fellow turned to shout back, &ldquo;Prove it! Prove it!&rdquo; but did not wait. However, the young fellow had a defender. At first, I took him for a Jew because of his long nose and eyeglasses. Leaning forward from his seat, he said: &ldquo;This is a free country! He can sell what he likes! Try and stop him!&rdquo; Now I could see that his hair was dark blond and his profile not at all Jewish. The two passengers began to shout at each other. Others joined in. A girl stopped to yell something just before she left at a station. It was hard to make out above the roar of the train  if anyone wanted to what they were saying. Three of the passengers, well-dressed women in a group, were much amused at this sudden storm; but other passengers among those who were silent  became grim and sad, particularly the Jews.
Once we've laboriously disconnected our old conjunctions  &lsquo;physical,&rsquo; &lsquo;solid,&rsquo; &lsquo;real,&rsquo; &lsquo;material&rsquo; freed them from antique measure to admit what, even through eyes not naked but robed in optic devices, is not perceptible (oh, precisely is not perceptible!): admitted that &lsquo;large&rsquo; and &lsquo;small&rsquo; are bereft of meaning, since not matter but process, process only, gathers itself to appear knowable:  then what we feel in moments of bleak arrest, panic's black cloth falling over our faces, over our breath, is a new twist of Pascal's dread, a shift of scrutiny, its object now inside our flesh, the  within our own atoms, inside the least particle of what we supposed our mortal selves (and  what are they?) its object now bits of the Void left over from before the Fiat Lux, immeasurably incorporate in our discarnate, fictive, (yes, but sentient,) notion of substance, inaccurate as our language, flux which the soul alone pervades, elusive but persistent.
The world pours in on wings of song. The radio says whatever told to but in mind, air of another kind, it holds a place in the air's space. Sounds now are so various, a pig, goat's bleat. The burros somewhere. The air hums, tick of a watch, motor's blur outside, a sequent birds' tweeting. All the ambient movement neither seen nor felt but endlessly, endlessly heard.
I love you love me let's get together &amp; go to sea &amp; stay away &amp; fuck all day please miss blackie can we split I'll kiss your mouth pull yr tit. Gently as sun as breeze where we go please miss blackie can we blow?
Why do you want me to slap you before I make love to you, then wonder why I do you like I do? <> <> <> Crawling, pleading and being kittenish are no habits of the world's rare cat; shut up in the mind's dark cage; prowling in a garden of persimmon, mangoes and the long black python <> <> <> When the hunter comes his gleaming blue coat will galvanize him; his pearls of sabre teeth will electrify him; his avocado-green claws will expose his guts <> <> <> The scout will run back thru the forest; 4 Thieves Vinegar on his tail; the whole safari not far behind his trail; the dolls left behind will bare your face; and the cloth on the bush will be your lace; you are the jeweler's Ruby that has fled its case <> <> <> The cat was dying to meet you in the flesh but you never came he wanted you wild but you wanted him tame, why is your highness afraid of the night? <> <>
Other times it's the very way the moon slips you into memories of flying at will anyplace you wanna go. Veracruz will do, or maybe an overnight at the Hotel Jupiter, an ocean slosh away from many nowheres. Can there be such a place without the whole notion sounding corny? Moon &amp; memory are like that. So are thoughts, &amp; all the aughts you oughtta cleared before you went moooon, like a milkcow mooing at noon in June atop a sad dune. O the pleasures of everyday English! It's enough to make a poor lovesick dish take up &amp; run away with a spoon.
The terrible fear, the fear of feeling, Must I hear it defended on every side? Live like a madman echoing his cell? The fact is I am whole and very well, Joyful, centered, not to be turned aside, Full of healing and of self-healing. Only the muse does not bid me cease, Who does not listen and who cannot care, Has never said &ldquo;Be quiet,&rdquo; uttered harm. She, the dark angel and the silent charm, Is all of hope and nothing of despair, And in her long withholding is my peace. Here joy does live quite close to agony, But why does everyone see only pain? Now I am with my deepest self again, Why are they so afraid, afraid for me? Who must be changed? Only myself, of course. But this has always been the work at hand; I live by its inexorable demand, And must be changed to reach the deepest source. Who to be hurt, who to be killed but me? The phoenix who must burn to die and live. Who says that through my death I nothing give? Though I am nothing, the fire is Mystery. Who cannot see this curious work of grace? Who tells the poet, &ldquo;silence, danger here!&rdquo; God knows I live each day in greater fear, And out of agony structure my face To sustain tension, yet discover poise, For this Magnificat of severe joys.
Inodorous and inoffensive poudrette: our dust and ashes and our waxy bones which slip so easily into a basin to wash the dead cleaner than clean, to cleanliness as never before. You feel the round shapes in a woman's head and realize the human race is clones and talk, a mask of fragrant etiquette to cover up the smell of decomposition. I like the story of Caravaggio's whore playing the Virgin Mary; I also like the Raising of Lazarus by Giotto, all that foulness turned to good use, like a motto based on others' suffering. We have a mission to convert the heathen and to slake their thirst for knowledge. Look, we may say, this is what we have to offer you. We are the Fathers. Here is the Gospel of the New which we have brought down from Heaven this very day to proclaim unto both the gentiles and the Jews. Henceforth ignorance will be no excuse.
The whiskey's prurience through the inner pipes. This is the change and leaving of thy name. If the fungus of drunken breathing Mist feels at the mirrors Like doubt turning to anger In the judge's face. Blond beer cylinders weave The waitresses' trays ripple over our heads. I am alone but the others are with me Tasting the same food, drink and sleep After the day of ambush When anguish made the soul efficient With bell, book and candle, When the lie startled like stoats into hiding In the eyes of butcher, baker and banker, When death put up a showy magazine front For officer and ranker. It is a kind of dream-desecration Of the most beautiful forms man has imagined: Yet you feel less defiled than when you see The uncompetitive horror in the eyes Of a dying man A little before death. A shabby-nosed old drunk Limns with one loyal, black-gloved hand The motions of a baton, orchestrating Out of the oxen heart The world, the flesh and the devil, The dare of the trumpets, ivied erosion of theme, Violin-shell children.
I study out a dark similitude: Her image fades, yet does not disappear  Must I stay tangled in that lively hair? Is there no way out of that coursing blood? A dry soul's wisest. O, I am not dry! My darling does what I could never do: She sighs me white, a Socrates of snow. We think too long in terms of what to be; I live, alive and certain as a bull; A casual man, I keep my casual word, Yet whistle back at every whistling bird. A man alive, from all light I must fall. I am my father's son, I am John Donne Whenever I see her with nothing on. The moon draws back its waters from the shore. By the lake's edge, I see a silver swan, And she is what I would. In this light air, Lost opposites bend down  Sing of that nothing of which all is made, Or listen into silence, like a god.
<> Memory, two wedged women (Sparse hair, New England boned), Will know you in your bed, Will find you as you lie wan-faced, Staring toward sand, into sea, and dead. Count your joints! Gather yourself! You said aloneness was the flute. Take upon your knee each meaning, See what your infants are. Now you will shiver alone alone! Water is thin spread far. Exile the sprung bow turned into splint. Yet does that make bewilderment the more? The equivalent of God is now to find him. It is the return of epic man; It is the ring of legend dissected; It is the clock where sands once ran. On my knees are two hands. Those hands, these knees, are mine. Under the sun, I am articulate Laughter, and still by the edge of my brother. In what modern ship-thing did I sail? Unwomb me now, my mother! Speaking to Exiles, the one Exile: Words are yours, and knowing  In profile smoking blue smoke At tables or in far rooms, Grasping to hold this book, that line  Whether the frantic age declines or looms, Islands are mothers into sea, Sons the frail gulls circling  Circling without minds or lives, Balanced in wind, unborn, undone. Now, wrung at the breaking, there are tears: Exile, you are unmothered; the islands are gone.
But in the distance all was peaceful. Far to the north, up on the plateau fine smoke. Somebody roasting somebody. Far to the west a gathering of hunters, fat as opossums. Their jaws were masticating every kind of mammal and bird, as if to choke the balance of the sky. Far to the south grey clouds were copulating and a bolt of lightning was stuck in the clay, shaped like a tree. On the field-path by the mouse-hole bloomed a butterbur confused by this spectacle of autumn, although it was all perfectly obvious.
sometime,perhaps in Paris we will have the enormous bright hour of evening when lazily the prostitutes are taking thither and hither their bright slender voices along the boulevards,among the sitting people in caf&eacute;s &ldquo;the world is,you feel (I just saw a man in a taxi who looked like God) a little sudden whore skilfully dying in Somebody's arms,on the way to the theatre.&rdquo; &ldquo;Did you?&rdquo; &ldquo;And just suppose it were.Wouldn't poor Royce's hair tremble?What would Old Man Emerson say?&rdquo; &ldquo;Emerson would probably say &lsquo;I went to Paris and found myself.&rsquo;&rdquo; &ldquo;Probably.&rdquo; &ldquo;And think of this one: &lsquo;Godal Mighty and Myself,by Frank Harris&rsquo;!&rdquo;
Parachutes were still made of silk. Scarves fell through a careless sky, so many scarves dragged across Europe while the Glenn Miller Orchestra played nothing but &ldquo;Perfidia.&rdquo; When the troops opened their rip cords, the fields that would break their fall waited with anticipation and second thoughts, like women who worry that the neck can't feel the difference between the silk of a new scarf and the hands of a tender strangler.
same book a different page look once opens up as world goes heights enough some family in a shoe what a dream is huge ad by someone giant colorful tome lettering map index real thick names
The small birds swirl around; The high cicadas chirr; A towhee pecks the ground; I look at the first star: My heart held to its joy, This whole September day. The moon goes to the full; The moon goes slowly down; The wood becomes a wall. Far things draw closer in. A wind moves through the grass, Then all is as it was. What rustles in the fern? I feel my flesh divide. Things lost in sleep return As if out of my side, On feet that make no sound Over the sodden ground. The small shapes drowse: I live To woo the fearful small; What moves in grass I love  The dead will not lie still, And things throw light on things, And all the stones have wings.
is a condition  of bedrooms whose electricity is brickish or made into  T beams They dangle them on wire cables to the tops of Woolworth buildings  five and ten cents worth  There they have bolted them into place at masculine risk  Or a boy with a rose under the lintel of his cap standing to have his picture taken on the butt of a girder  with the city a mile down  captured, lonely cock atop  iron girders wears rosepetal smile a thought of Indians  on chestnut branches to end &ldquo;walking on the air&rdquo;
With fall on fall, from wood to wood,  The brook pours mossy music down  Or is it, in the solitude,  The murmur of a Faery town? A town of Elfland filled with bells  And holiday of hurrying feet: Or traffic now, whose small sound swells,  Now sinks from busy street to street. Whose Folk I often recognize  In wing&eacute;d things that hover round, Who to men's eyes assume disguise  When on some Faery errand bound.  The bee, that haunts the touch-me-not,  Big-bodied, making braggart din, Is elfin brother to that sot,  Jack Falstaff of the Boar's Head Inn. The dragon-fly, whose wings of black  Are mantle for his garb of green, Is Ancient to this other Jack,  Another Pistol, long and lean. The butterfly, in royal tints,  Is Hal, mad Hal in cloth of gold, Who passes these, as once that Prince  Passed his companions boon of old.
I'd tell of stones dropping upon me from a high mountain, but to leave is to lose a mountain and to stay is to cry, Let me go away. I would know if you were to stop suddenly from hurling your stones and remained perfectly still and cold in my presence. Then I would leave humiliated, seeking for something to be aware of me, even in anger, as you are. But such anger  why am I made aware of it and why does it prolong its torture of me if its purpose is to be rid of me? That question keeps me rooted beneath your height on which I see the sun dazzle my eyes, as though everything were well and behovely.
 If I were well-to-do I would put roses on roses, and cover your grave With multitude of white roses, and just a few  Red ones, a bloody-white flag over you.  So people passing under The ash-trees of the valley road, should raise Their eyes to your bright place, and then in wonder  Should climb the hill, and put the flowers asunder.  And seeing it is your birthday, They would say, seeing each mouth of white rose praise You highly, every blood-red rose display  Your triumph of anguish above you, they would say:  &ldquo;'Tis strange, we never knew While she was here and walking in our ways That she was as the wine-jar whence we drew  Our draught of faith that sent us on anew.&rdquo;  And so I'd raise A rose-bush unto you in all their hearts A rose of memory with a scent of praise  Wafting like solace down their length of days.
<>  Grew lean while he assailed the seasons; He wept that he was ever born,  And he had reasons. Miniver loved the days of old  When swords were bright and steeds were prancing; The vision of a warrior bold  Would set him dancing. Miniver sighed for what was not,  And dreamed, and rested from his labors; He dreamed of Thebes and Camelot,  And Priam's neighbors. Miniver mourned the ripe renown  That made so many a name so fragrant; He mourned Romance, now on the town,  And Art, a vagrant. Miniver loved the Medici,  Albeit he had never seen one; He would have sinned incessantly  Could he have been one. Miniver cursed the commonplace  And eyed a khaki suit with loathing; He missed the medi&aelig;val grace  Of iron clothing. Miniver scorned the gold he sought,  But sore annoyed was he without it; Miniver thought, and thought, and thought,  And thought about it. Miniver Cheevy, born too late,  Scratched his head and kept on thinking; Miniver coughed, and called it fate,  And kept on drinking.
I only dreamed that high cliff we were on overlooking Wisdom and the Big Hole drain. I dreamed us high enough to not see men, dreamed old land behind us better left and we were vagabond. We went twice to Wisdom, not in dream. Once in day, odd couple after Brooks, and then at night, dark derelicts obsessed with fake false fronts for tourists and the empty church. I dream the cliff again. Evening. Deep beneath, Wisdom turning lights on. Neon flakes are planets when we touch. I wake up shouting, Wisdom's not that much, and sweating. Wisdom never will be bright. Lord, we need sun. We need moon. Fern and mercy. Form and dream destroyed. Need the cliff torn down. To hold hands and stare down the raw void of the day. Be my contraband. Three fat Eastern Brook a night, that's my private limit. The cliff broke and wind pours in on Wisdom leaving false fronts really what they seem. Morning Wisdom, Kathy. It is no dream.
I rose up in the world, Ooray! rose very high, for me. An earl once asked me down to stay and a duchess once came to tea. I didn't stay very long with the earl and the duchess has done with me. But still, I rose quite high in the world don't you think? or don't you agree? But now I am slithering down again, down the trunk of the slippery tree; I find I'd rather get back to earth, where I belong, you see. Up there I didn't like it, chattering, though not with glee, the whole of the time, and nothing mattering at least, not to me. God, let me down to earth again away from the upper ten millions for there's millions of 'em up there but not any men.
I have gone past all those times when the poets Were beautiful as only The rich can be. The cold bangles Of the moon grazed one of my shoulders, And so to this day, And beyond, I carry The sliver of a white city, the barb of a jewel In my left clavicle that hunches. Tonight I sling A scrambling sack of oblivions and lame prayers On my right good arm. The Ohio River Has flown by me twice, the dark jubilating Isaiah of mill and smoke marrow. Blind son Of a meadow of huge horses, lover of drowned islands Above Steubenville, blind father Of my halt gray wing: Now I limp on, knowing The moon strides behind me, swinging The scimitar of the divinity that struck down The hunchback in agony When he saw her, naked, carrying away his last sheep Through the Asian rocks.
I remember when all these fields were factories, when an industry was the limitation beyond which the city couldn't think. Before our shorefronts needed to know what their former yards had built to fill in the information boards. This was before the bomb, the bomb, the modernist bomb, the bomb that cleanses. Picture a Heinkel, thrown into a himmelwarp by passing over Bonnybridge in 1942, emerging to continue its mission in the mid- 60s and blow Dundee, blow all your cities backwards. Wonderfully my grandfather, though dead, is still on duty in the volunteer fire service, and able to catch the first few incendiaries, like women fainting at a dance, vomitting on their heavy spangly dresses: his helmet gleams like a pie-dish on the drainer. But then the heavy-nippled storm begins. Only the buildings of historic or architectural interest are struck; only the quarters of any character are hit. The bomber is felled by an indignant bottle cast from Lochee, where its casualties lie, pants around their smoking ankles, their budgies gargling their last in the cracked uncacked-in toilet bowls. A policeman like a column of oatmeal points his shaking revolver at the jute-coloured head of the survivor, pulled from the harbour, who says, &lsquo;The question here is where to put the muzzle? The stomach beckons, then the ear, the mouth. Your indecision is built from endings: it's built of evenings smoking out to sea in a wake of oil and clocks and bobbing canisters; it's built of absent records huddled in your memory's implosive shelter; it's built of everything that travels back to the engine the angel, the heart, the honey. Through such compelling darknesses its answer always comes: &lsquo;&ldquo;What is looking for us in all these means?&rdquo;&rsquo;
As what's-his-name says in 109, movement three I went to that favorite magazine store to find an image but it was closed permanently closed it seems by means of an ancient lock and key, went to her ear for a word or more The inclination of her head beneath the rain instructed me As David said in a recent letter the time's about to arrive for someone close someone I almost know the false sky has never been this blue and by blue I mean a specific blue made of letters I forget  call it this or that The train departs during such a period in such weather: storm from the northwest lasting as long as a single night which can't be divided The two embracing in the courtyard below must know that even the stars' bond betrays Still let's happily believe in the figure for a while. It's enough
Walking with a virgin heart  The green hills of May, Me, the Wind, she took as lover  By her side to play, Let me toss her untied hair,  Let me shake her gown, Careless though the daisies redden,  Though the sun frown, Scorning in her gay habit  Lesser love than this, My cool spiritual embracing,  My secret kiss. So she walked, the proud lady,  So danced or ran, So she loved with a whole heart,  Neglecting man.... Fade, fail, innocent stars  On the green of May: She has left our bournes for ever,  Too fine to stay.
 Jean, let me introduce Sir Robert Frazer,  But once in Wiltshire years ago you met,  Don't you remember?  Yes, I can't forget ...  Our Hostess acts the imbecile, it pays her.   You always were so horrid about people.   And you were always bringing out their best.   Bob, do behave like any other guest ...   Do you remember Wagdon Prior steeple   And how it rises out of Salisbury plain?   I dislike steeples seen at any angle,   How strange that we should only meet to wrangle.   Frankly, I hope we never shall again.   But do say something in this awful lull,   You always had the gift of being dull.
We had something to do for a moment with the eternity of things, we made contact, the sweeps deeper than we knew, moving in and out without regard, we, bits, too little too brief to take the awful informings in: age edges us aside: we vacate offices (such as listening for the loud, dull oriole in May) to others whose earth earth's becoming: but, aside, we note clearly, having them separate again, bit from power, second from time's springs: look, there goes eternity, still astir: here are roses seen before: nothing's to save us at last save loss itself: even our gatherings, bits and pieces, will with our central dissolving float free, disordered, unaligned, the chairs empty, our voices in none of the rooms: well, it was enough, even if nothing came of it, no, it was something even if it becomes nothing, the show turned full round: freedom freely enough allowed burns free, burns us free.
The soft mouths of summer bite at the eyes, Toothless as a rose and red as the ragged robin;  Mouths on lip  Rouse to sleep And the green of the field reflected in the skies. The elder-flower curls inward to a dream, And memories swarm as a halo of midges;  Children on the grass,  Wicket-high, pass, In bue sailor jackets and jerseys brown and cream. Among the champion, legendary men I see my childhood roll like a cricket-ball.  To watch that boy  Is now my joy  That he could watch me not was
The island dreams under the dawn And great boughs drop tranquillity; The peahens dance on a smooth lawn, A parrot sways upon a tree, Raging at his own image in the enamelled sea. Here we will moor our lonely ship And wander ever with woven hands, Murmuring softly lip to lip, Along the grass, along the sands, Murmuring how far away are the unquiet lands: How we alone of mortals are Hid under quiet boughs apart, While our love grows an Indian star, A meteor of the burning heart, One with the tide that gleams, the wings that gleam and dart, The heavy boughs, the burnished dove That moans and sighs a hundred days: How when we die our shades will rove, When eve has hushed the feathered ways, With vapoury footsole by the water's drowsy blaze.
Note the stump, a peach tree. We had to cut it down. It banged the window every wind. Our garden swayed with corn each summer. Our crops were legend and our kindness. Whatever stranger came, we said, &lsquo;Come in.&rsquo; We ran excited. &lsquo;Someone's come to see us.&rsquo; By night we were exhausted. The dark came early in that home, came early for the last time soon. Some nights in motels, I wake bewildered by the room. Then I remember where I am. I turn the light on and the girl's still there, smiling from the calendar whatever the year. When I'm traveling, I'm hurt. I tune in certain radio stations by heart, the ones that play old tunes like nothing worthwhile's happened since that funeral in 1949. When I'm in the house I've bought, I don't dwell on the loss of trees, don't cry when neighbors move away or dogs get killed by cars. I'm old enough to know a small girl's tears are fated to return, years from now in some Berlin hotel, though I seem to sit unfeeling at the window watching it all like a patron. I'm taking it in, deep where I hope it will bloom. That is the crude self I've come to. The man who says suffer, stay poor and I can create. Believe me, friends, I offer you your homes and wish you well in them. May kisses rain. May you find warm arms each morning. May your favorite tree be blooming in December. And may you never be dispossessed, forced to wander a world the color of salt with no young music in it.
The frequency of images of the moon Is more or less. The pearly women that drop From heaven and float in air, like animals Of ether, exceed the excelling witches, whence They came. But, brown, the ice-bear sleeping in ice-month In his cave, remains dismissed without a dream, As if the centre of images had its Congenial mannequins, alert to please, Beings of other beings manifold  The shadowless moon wholly composed of shade, Women with other lives in their live hair, Rose women as half-fishes of salt shine, As if, as if, as if the disparate halves Of things were waiting in a bethrothal known To none, awaiting espousal to the sound Of right joining, a music of ideas, the burning And breeding and bearing birth of harmony, The final relation, the marriage of the rest.
<> as if we've been summoned and packed one bag and spent long hours aloft with someplace to get to. As if something inside us is at last catching up, turning the corner, as it has forever, just in time to witness another departure. Oh, the past is always on foot, panting, rags bound around its shoes, relishing its glimpse of the future it sired, knowing, from a distance, that child's secret games. The past  And our arrivals, these heartrending announcements of ourselves, what are they but the mutiny of every other of our senses  one moment when the heart's closed circuitry, like a door nudged open by a knee, admits all of us.
Black dust Surrogate tongue or brush (call it asteroid interference or somatic clot) disperses into the atmosphere Call them particles or embers, last remains or first inkling of words by which you might come to know exactly where you are standing walking on earth's shifting shelves a half-written book some pages missing others eaten by mice slipping through the door linking this now to any other
Say Yes to all and be condensed in fact! Poems are sermonettes for all the interlocking tremors in the land. The brain turns toward its great surprise like a revolving door holding a giant red ant Surprised? It rains with gusto. What are we doing here with the recipe for father? Take two parts sand and one part ladder. Mix with parsley, fry and scatter. And then say Yes to the precisely knotted whip which lashes down your succession and up your ancestry, so that in touching each past or future face it can change you from shit to gold? O stamp of hell o electricity!
I didn't have to buy the acid. I found it in an old battery in the barn Where the cows make sea noises And the cobwebs are plated gold. There were packets of birdseed, white floats Of cork, turpentine, and an old black fishline Which shouldn't have worked but did. All of it a sin for the taking  I chose the acid for its smoke And the fishline to tie around my toe To remind me of the smoke. I threw the rotten apples into the yard And the blue hog charged. He was unpardonable, having Killed my sister's child. John couldn't Butcher him  <> I poured the acid into pink Christmas bulbs And sewed them into the hollowed apples. I put them out into the sun to soften. The hog swallowed them whole like smoke. By the time he looked under himself He was already broke. My long dress shook. He stopped to give me a look, And then ran straight at the barn. His head and shoulders passed through the boards. The horse inside Had a hissing fit over him. Nobody Has ridden that horse since Except for the devil Who's said to still be in the district.
Jubal sang of the Wrath of God  And the curse of thistle and thorn  But Tubal got him a pointed rod,  And scrabbled the earth for corn.  Old old as that early mould,   Young as the sprouting grain   Yearly green is the strife between   Jubal and Tubal Cain! Jubal sang of the new-found sea,  And the love that its waves divide  But Tubal hollowed a fallen tree  And passed to the further side.  Black black as the hurricane-wrack,   Salt as the under-main   Bitter and cold is the hate they hold    Jubal and Tubal Cain! Jubal sang of the golden years  When wars and wounds shall cease  But Tubal fashioned the hand-flung spears  And show&egrave;d his neighbours peace.  New new as the Nine-point-Two,   Older than Lamech's slain   Roaring and loud is the feud avowed   Twix' Jubal and Tubal Cain! Jubal sang of the cliffs that bar  And the peaks that none may crown  But Tubal clambered by jut and scar  And there he builded a town.  High high as the snowsheds lie,   Low as the culverts drain   Wherever they be they can never agree    Jubal and Tubal Cain!
The least, the meanest, goes down to less; there's never an end. And you can learn looking for less and again, less; your eyes don't get sharper. For there is less eyesight; and no end to that. There is you, there is less-you: the merest trace   less-eyes will find it.
fair ladies tall lovers riding are through the (with wonder into colours all into singing)may wonder a with deep (A so wonder pure) even than the green the new the earth more moving(all gay fair brave tall young come they)through the may in fragrance and song wonderingly come (brighter than prayers) riding through a Dream like fire called flowers over green the new earth a day of may under more a blue than blue can be sky always(through fragrance and singing)come lovers with slender their ladies (Each youngest)in sunlight
The  In three weeks he was dead. Ninety-three years to build a name   <> that fine crack in the glaze. Then he &lsquo;suffered a short illness&rsquo;; that's what the illness was. Irreversible. John Ashbery should watch out. Hiding as John Ash in Haight-Ashbury won't help in the clash of Haight-Asch with John Ashbury; it's got to happen. I'm just the maker of mutant poems. In one <> Organic Form overproduces. Here's my poem  to feed off itself, and breed:    <> <> Now it's  <>    <> <> For  for     Chisellers! cut deep into the firm, glistening sand   <>
rain wind light cold cold dark late stem gate bar flame knife garden blue noise morning son loud art alive net tiger storm lily job tear maker shove mirrorMoonwork coaststar deergood frogSUNsoul tunnelI am the music you makebook gravethe blue wings of the oceanlift noosethe crying of the black swanworld supperSLEEPbody beautyI am the friendstone fearof your childhoodtown heightsweave gardenBirdsIt is in my heart to wish youcenter tasteno sorrowbreak climbno painafraid willfor I am the will of your last beingno betrayalskill lookthe shudder of the breaking openthing wingof terrible gatesO thou art goodlaugh valleyand wisegrow I am the cave and the light ruleand kindlingthree the watch God keeps namea new firekeep when His children go mad knockforce angelLIVEI am the death you seekother shadowthe life you are afraidcharm terrorto knowsoar quest power rise tree knowledge innocence fall hand thorn get father chain spool law peace turtle grass snow prayer life black deep first tie hit see eye
It promises quiet here. A green Plymouth has been a long time sitting across the street. The lady in 2428 limps with a cane and west of me fields open all the way to the mountains, all the way I imagine to the open sea. A three colored dog doesn't bark, and between 2428 and 24 I see blocks away a chicken coop in disrepair, what in the distance seems moss on the roof and for certain the windows out, for terribly certain no chickens, and for beautifully sure a gray pile of lumber in a vacant lot. My first morning is cloudy. A rumpled dirty sheet of clouds is crawling northeast, not threatening rain, but obscuring the Rattlesnake range. In 2430 a woman is moving, muted to ghost behind dotted swiss curtains. She drives a pale green Falcon. This neighborhood seems a place where lives, like cars, go on a long time. It has few children. I'm somewhat torn. On one hand, I believe no one should own land. You can't respect what you own. Better we think of spirits as owning the land, and use it wisely, giving back at least as much as we take, repaying land with Indian rituals of thanks. And I think when we buy, just the crude fact of money alone means we really pay out some part of self we should have retained. On the other hand, at least fifty buntings are nervously pecking my lawn.
<> And feel the final wound, and all deny: ... Your lessening speech, the periods of space Outspread. Waiting the tranced reply. And now in no direction turn To hear the answer with the little sigh. This waste of space all wandering with no cry. O lovely sphinx, imperative of moods, As when you stood in doorway when we turned, Or on the path in the late littered woods, And smiled and walked apart, who still refuse As if you heard but had not heart to choose The word to speak. So Silence has Made all yourself his answer of one phrase.
In the park we stoop for the feathers of gulls, a few black and white, large and small. And we speculate: wouldn't it be fine to begin writing with such quills! We'll slice them obliquely and try, and a small white on is just what I need for my brown suede fedora bought from the first garage sale we found in New Zealand. Then we sit on a bench and I remember the day my son craned his neck upward and begged a peacock, &ldquo;Please, Peacock, throw me down a feather!&rdquo; And how I love him now! and how far I am from all others upon this earth  even you who sit beside me on a green bench and mean well, as I know. For I must yet forgive all those who cannot love him as I do. Fanatics are like this always, with their Christ or their Buddha. But what a poet he was, my son, knowing how we must beg for it, the small gift, and that there is nothing more clearly from heaven, nothing less of a scrap so befuzzed and casual and dubious and easily scorned. And yet, is not this feather on Sunday from heaven?
Harlem is vicious modernism. BangClash. Vicious the way its made. Can you stand such beauty? So violent and transforming. The trees blink naked, being so few. The women stare and are in love with them selves. The sky sits awake over us. Screaming at us. No rain. Sun, hot cleaning sun drives us under it. The place, and place meant of black people. Their heavy Egypt. (Weird word!) Their minds, mine, the black hope mine. In Time. We slide along in pain or too happy. So much love for us. All over, so much of what we need. Can you sing yourself, your life, your place on the warm planet earth. And look at the stones the hearts, the gentle hum of meaning. Each thing, life we have, or love, is meant for us in a world like this. Where we may see ourselves all the time. And suffer in joy, that our lives are so familiar.
He was a man married in mind and body in all the best ways. He wrote letters to a lover while his wife slept. He was a man who enjoyed his guilt like old wine, who said  and meant it. He lived well in a small room. Once he rode through Mexico on a spotted horse and wore spurs, and for days at a time would dream; once he visited Guevara in the green jungle, ate roasted parrot and smiled. He particularly enjoys short women with large breasts. He watches them walk and he gives them names, families, fathers whom he went to war with, and pets with long gold-tipped hair. Whatever a man thinks about dying he denies even though he will say it. His afflicted sleep is all the day leaves him after the ravages of its happiness. So at night he writes letters to a lover while his wife sleeps in their dark and dangerous bed. The sun rises over Moscow while he licks the sharp edge of the envelope. Once he cut his tongue so deeply he cried.
Pink may, double may, dead laburnum  Shedding an Anglo-Jackson shade, Shall we ever, my staunch Myfanwy,  Bicycle down to North Parade? Kant on the handle-bars, Marx in the saddlebag,  Light my touch on your shoulder-blade. Sancta Hilda, Myfanwyatia  Evansensis I hold your heart, Willowy banks of a willowy Cherwell a  Willowy figure with lips apart, Strong and willowy, strong to pillow me,  Gold Myfanwy, kisses and art. Tubular bells of tall St. Barnabas,  Single clatter above St. Paul, Chasuble, acolyte, incense-offering, Spectacled faces held in thrall. There in the nimbus and Comper tracery  Gold Myfanwy blesses us all. Gleam of gas upon Oxford station,  Gleam of gas on her straight gold hair, Hair flung back with an ostentation,  Waiting alone for a girl friend there. Second in Mods and a Third in Theology Come to breathe again Oxford air. <>   Tentative brush of a cheek in a cocoa crush,  Coffee and Ulysses, Tennyson, Joyce, Alpha-minded and other dimensional,  Freud or Calvary? Take your choice. <>  Bicycle bells in a Boar's Hill Pine, Stedman Triple from All Saints' steeple,  Tom and his hundred and one at nine, Bells of Butterfield, caught in Keble, Sally and backstroke answer &ldquo;
Memorial Day flowers were spread on the waters Woman Mayor Corliss, the florist's wife, made a speech. A helicopter dropped a wreath. The paper carried the usual veterans' pension plug (they died, without etc.) etc. A parade. People fainted. Children got trampled on. But none of the dead rose to the occasion
Great little berries in the dogwood, great little  scattered through the branches, perfect wood for burning, three great candelabra with dozens of candles, great open space for sun and wind, great view, the mountain making a shadow, the river racing behind the weeds, great willow, great shoots, great burning heart of the fields, nice leaves from last year's crop, nice veins and threads, nice twigs, mostly red, some green and silky, nice sky, nice clouds, nice bluish void. I light my candles, I travel quickly from twig to twig, I touch the buttons before I light them it is my birthday, two hundred years I count the buds, they come in clusters of four and seven, some are above me, I gather a bunch and hold it against my neck; that is the burning bush to my left, I pick some flaming berries, I hang them over my tree, nice God, nice God, the silence is broken by the flames, the voice is a kind of tenor there is a note of hysteria I came there first, I lit the tree myself, I made a roaring sound, for two or three minutes I had a hidden voice I try to blow the candles out, nice breath, nice wagon wheel, great maple, great chimes, great woodpile, great ladder, great mound of tires, nice crimson berries, nice desert, nice mountain.
Thermopylae is a well of agony. Leonidas is dying; it is a common death; he was not a great man. But there are other matters to consider: the role played by the rain  (the wounded, of course but the wounded <> went on to Athens and this city burned &ldquo;to the ground.&rdquo;) and the part taken by the famous Spartan idiot which sat smiling at a blue angel who unaccountably persisted in drawing on and off a pair of glass gloves. Sit then, Darius, on your throne of empire. The wounded die and the rain rains; but the smell of blood does not fade. It is always the great men who fail.
I'm convinced from a few words she let drop that while she lay beside me in bed, I asleep and she awake, she began to spy on my dreams. I must find out what she was after. Was she trying to find out if I still loved her? I do, very much. Is some jealousy at work? Did I talk to Jennifer too much at the party? (Jennifer can be very amusing.) Does she suspect that as much as I show my love for her I'm really some kind of monster that doesn't belong in the human race? How should I trap the beautiful intruder? Should I perhaps pretend to talk in my sleep and make up something that would dispel her anxiety and put her mind at rest?
<> The lamps are not yet ready; and the gloom Of this sad winter evening, and the din The wind makes in the street fills all the  room. You have listened to my stories Seumas  Beg Has finished the adventures of his youth, And no more hopes to find a buried keg Stuffed to the lid with silver! He, in truth, And all alas, grew up! But he has found The path to newer romance, and, with you, May go seek wonders. We are bound Out to the storm of things, and all is new! Give me your hand! So, keeping close  to me, Shut tight your eyes! Step forward! ... Where are we?
Shut in with phantoms of life's hollow hopes, And shadows of old sins satiety slew, And the young ghosts of the dead dreams love knew, Out of the day into the night she gropes. Behind her, high the silvered summit slopes Of hope and faith, she will not turn to view; But towards the cave of heartbreak, harsh of hue, She goes, where all the dropsied horror ropes. There is a voice of waters in her ears, And on her brow a wind that never dies: One is the anguish of desired tears; One is the sorrow of unuttered sighs; And, burdened with the immemorial years, Downward she goes with never lifted eyes.
Sweet Dorothy, I know you're still out there somewhere, swallowing with flashing eyes everybody's closet gypsy fantasy, still a gas, a ghost, eternally awash in seas and high up among the closely watched. Dear Star, when I look up to take in All those mounds of mocha and good hair, I can't help but ask my heart: Well, if she can't make it then nobody can, certainly no lovely American spook; not even with good acting thrown in to boot. There was this movie on TV late the other night where you and some lover were going through hell across some dramatic hospital bed, yet in your head (I think I could tell) you were listening to some other bell chiming time, chiming you. The world will never know much of anything about you, and neither will I, but there's an itch I get watching this charade to ask your mama, the great actress maid, about these sapphires, all these pearls and rubies bright as stars.
1. Remain calm try not to panic. Very few victims of a mugging or a purse snatch are injured, if they remain calm. 2. Don't resist or try to overcome a perpetrator. 3. Study the perpetrator if you can. Note his description height, build, approximate age, facial features, articles of clothing, etc. 4. Call police as quickly as possible over police call box or public telephone 911 remain patient. 5. Notify the police in every case. Reports of every crime are necessary to help us assign patrolmen where needed. 6. Wait for the arrival of police don't leave. 7. When arrests are made cooperate with the police and the courts. The COMMUNITY and POLICE working TOGETHER will reduce this PROBLEM.
Happy the man who can long roaming reap, Like old Ulysses when he shaped his course Homeward at last toward the native source, Seasoned and stretched to plant his dreaming deep. When shall I see the chimney smoke once more Of my own village; in a fervent hour When maples blaze or lilac is in flower, Push open wide again my plain white door? Here is a little province, poor and kind  Warmer than marble is the weathered wood; Dearer than holy Ganges, the wild brook; And sweeter than all Greece to this one mind A ragged pasture, open green, white steeple, And these whom I have come to call my people.
All men are lonely now. This is the hour when no man has a friend. Memory and Faith suspend From their spread wings above a cool abyss. All friendships end. He that lay awake All night For sweet love's unregenerate sake, Sleeps in the grey light. The lover, if he dream at all, Dreams not of her whose languid hand sleeps open at his side; He is gone to another bride. And she he leaves behind Sighs not in sleep &ldquo;Unkind ... unkind ...&rdquo;; She walks in a garden of yellow quinces; Smiling, she gathers yellow quinces in a basket Of willow and laurel combined. Should I return to your door, Fresh and haggard out of the morning air, There would be darkness on the stair, And a dead close odour painfully sad, That was not there before. There would be silence. There would be heavy steps across the floor. And you would let me in, frowning with sleep Under your rumpled hair. Beautiful now upon the ear unshut by slumber The rich and varied voices of the waking day!  The mighty, mournful whistles without number Of tugs and ferries, mingling, confounding, failing, Thinning to separate notes of wailing, Making stupendous music on the misty bay. Now through the echoing street in the growing light, Intent on errands that the sun approves, Clatter unashamed the heavy wheels and hooves Before the silent houses; briskly they say: &ldquo;Marshal not me among the enterprises of the night. I am the beginning of the day.&rdquo;
Faithful to your commandments, o consciousness, o Holy bird of words soaring ever whether to nothingness or to inconceivable fulfillment slowly: And still I follow you, awkward as that dandy of ontology and as awkward as his albatross and as another dandy of ontology before him, another shepherd and watchdog of being, the one who Talked forever of forever as if forever of having been and being an ancient mariner, Hesitant forever as if forever were the albatross Hung round his neck by the seven seas of the seven muses, and with as little conclusion, since being never concludes, Studying the sibilance and the splashing of the seas and of seeing and of being's infinite seas, Staring at the ever-blue and the far small stars and the faint white endless curtain of the twinkling play's endless seasons.
Civilized, crying how to be human again: this will tell you how. Turn outward, love things, not men, turn right away from humanity, Let that doll lie. Consider if you like how the lilies grow, Lean on the silent rock until you feel its divinity Make your veins cold, look at the silent stars, let your eyes Climb the great ladder out of the pit of yourself and man. Things are so beautiful, your love will follow your eyes; Things are the God, you will love God, and not in vain, For what we love, we grow to it, we share its nature. At length You will look back along the stars' rays and see that even The poor doll humanity has a place under heaven. Its qualities repair their mosaic around you, the chips of strength And sickness; but now you are free, even to become human, But born of the rock and the air, not of a woman.
<> <> He's not quite himself tonight, Partly because of alcohol, partly Because of what he'd be in this suburban home Without a guitar and slide On his lap. There are nine hard lacquer sides of him Somewhere in his prime, a voice So hair-raising not even the two-bit Fly-by-night engineer could do it harm. The folk society found the right person, But his hands are inarticulate. The first thing he does, without playing A note, is to give everybody The hard stuff:  Mumbles his scrunched back, <> Then you notice his scooped face, feel The old man's mask shift its weight Beneath your cheeks, hear his voice, realize That there is a button of ruin in the throat, That any accident might set it off one night, Start it, and leave it running. Embarrassed, Embarrassment blues, life-song of a man You won't catch spooling onto The tape. Though he's not the same and not getting paid (again), Eddie's game: he bow-wows into the mike <> But.
Mulholland extended his hand to Williams, eased him away from the polite avidity of reporters good men mostly, just doing their jackal job for us. Didn't we want to know exactly what public failure felt like? Mulholland extended his hand because he couldn't bear what had gone several questions too long, and Williams, <> down the middle. Mulholland must have known but for some grace ... some luck ... and how a public man is always a mistake or two from ruin. He extended his hand to Williams while the rest of us watched from our safe carpeted dens, and the Toronto players celebrated properly in their locker room. Back in Jersey, vandals had already thrown eggs at Williams' house, young men no doubt without doubt who felt others should die for them and succeed for them and make them happy. Oh the luxury of failing in private! Mulholland extended his hand to Williams who took it and walked out of the camera's exacting eye, and into history. Other teammates, sad themselves, tried to console him, unsure just then  as we were if sympathy could reach all the hard way to forgiveness.
They had the same name for each other. They evolved points of recognition. Marking distances that narrowed  in the street, in the park  they gained on themselves. Always the first to wake, she'd sip his breathings-out, crusty and toxic; he would soak in her dew: a vagrant sleeper in some drenched place. They unearthed mysteries of kinship, something quick in the blood, witching, venereal; their hermitage echoed, each day, to cooing and crowing. They traded only in bliss, taking their haul to caf&eacute;s, to theatre queues. By firelight she told stories of the antedeluvian world of friendships  here were the sole survivors, passionate mutants too fragile to prosper or breed.
That evening, over pancakes, when you told me it was not for love, not even for money but just for the children, then ran through those several other women, I must have looked for all the world like that lost, knocked-sideways, bowled-over girl who, at odds of more than a hundred-thousand-million to one, had come so far but never dropped across the word or the idea of snow. Then there it was one morning, acid-white and waiting as she reeled back the bedroom curtain, the lawn and the street, the whole picture ankle-deep and crisp and even and still snowing. Incredibly, she was twenty-something.
Then the wind was a charm against silence tucked under the pillow in that mute hour before sunrise when the stars are like all that remains of the wine in the glasses on the wedding-table, something was hovering above the earth, a cloud from another planet hollowed-out where a comet slept, tied together now in mourning with a black band. The one who was about to shut his eyes reached and pulled it down over the bottle standing on his forehead, over the jack-of-diamonds behind his left ear, over his cigarette and his prophet's beard. Now the secrets known only to that hat drift on into the troubles of a new day.
from the cognoscenti bingbongwhom chewchoo laugh dingle nails personally bung loamhome picpac obviously scratches tomorrowlobs wholeagainst you gringlehow exudes thursday fasters by button of whisper sum blinked he belowtry eye nowbrow sangsung n&eacute;e whitermuch grab sicksilk soak sulksuck whim poke if inch dimmer twist on permament and slap tremendous sorrydaze bog triperight election who so thumb o'clock asters miggle dim a ram flat hombre sin bangaroom slim guesser goose pin yessir wheel no sendwisp ben jiffyclaus bug fainarain wee celibate amaranth clutch owch so chuck slop hight evolute my eerily oh gargle to jip hug behemoth truly pseudo yours podia of radarw leschin
blk/poets die from not being read &amp; from, maybe, too much leg. some drank themselves into non-poets, but most poets who poet seldom die from overexposure.
In the small hours we eat sushi with our fingers. It is a cold night outside, and traffic lights up the ceiling in passing. On your skin is the smell of sweet abalone, sweat, and ark shell, and bluefin. You are picking red salmon eggs from white rice carefully, like a child with a chocolate biscuit. On your palms you warm the eggs, their soft red pearls. You break them open  their skins are so tender  with the tip of your tongue. It is a warm night and my heart is skipping along, skipping along  I would kiss you, but this is a time to remember and first I will watch you eating, and your grin quick in the dark. I'm getting it clear, so when I cast my mind back here it will come skipping, like a flat stone across flat water.
I tell ye, Malc, thon wes an eerie widdrim  I hud yestreen  noo I see the muin again. I wes staunin at the winnock  I kest my een up tae the lift  but the muin cam loose, in a gliff  it tumml't doon, the muckle thing, cam near and near, till it hud whumml't  amang the stooks, breenged  o a creel, and scowdert  a clood o flichters  like coaly gleeds  the watter-troch. I sweer there wes nae differ: richt in the middle o the field it wes, the muin, and oot it gaed, gaed slawly bleck; the gress aw roon began tae sneyster  I luikit up again intae the lift: naethin wes left bar a skimmer  it hud been claucht  that gart  As weel ye micht. It's aiblins on the cairds the muin could traipse doon someday tae yir rigs. Wha kens? Is it no true hoo simmer gies us shuitin-starns? Ay, but there's starns eneuch: it's little skaith  there's thoosans mair. But we've allanerly  the aesome  hes watched it faw, binna
To the woods, to the woods is the wizard gone; In his grotto the maiden sits alone. She gazes up with a weary smile At the rafter-hanging crocodile, The slowly swinging crocodile. Scorn has she of her master's gear, Cauldron, alembic, crystal sphere, Phial, philtre &lsquo;Fiddlededee For all such trumpery trash!&rsquo; quo' she. &lsquo;A soldier is the lad for me; Hey and hither, my lad! &lsquo;Oh, here have I ever lain forlorn: My father died ere I was born, Mother was by a wizard wed, And oft I wish I had died instead  Often I wish I were long time dead. But, delving deep in my master's lore, I have won of magic power such store I can turn a skull oh, fiddlededee For all this curious craft!&rsquo; quo' she. &lsquo;A soldier is the lad for me; Hey and hither, my lad! &lsquo;To bring my brave boy unto my arms, What need have I of magic charms  &ldquo;Abracadabra!&rdquo; and &ldquo;Prestopuff&rdquo;? I have but to wish, and that is enough. The charms are vain, one wish is enough. My master pledged my hand to a wizard; Transformed would I be to toad or lizard If e'er he guessed but fiddlededee For a black-browed sorcerer, now,&rsquo; quo' she. &lsquo;Let Cupid smile and the fiend must flee; Hey and hither, my lad.&rsquo;
here pasture ends  this girl and boy who're littler than (day disappears) their heartbeats dare some upward world of each more most prodigious Selves both now alive creatures(bright if by shadowy if)swallowing is everywhere beginningless a Magic of green solitude (go marvels come) as littler much than littlest they adventure(wish by terror)steep not guessable each infinite Oblivions found a by lost child and a(float through sleeping firsts of wonder)child unbreathingly share(huge Perhaps by hugest)dooms of miracle drift killed swim born a dream and(through stillness beyond conceiving)dream until No least leaf almost stirs as never(in againless depths of silence)and forever touch or until she and he become (on tiptoe at the very quick of nowhere)we  While one thrush sings
Spirits and illusions have died, The naked mind lives In the beauty of inanimate things. Flowers wither, grass fades, trees wilt, The forest is burnt; The rock is not burnt. The deer starve, the winter birds Die on their twigs and lie In the blue dawns in the snow. Men suffer want and become Curiously ignoble; as prosperity Made them curiously vile. But look how noble the world is, The lonely-flowing waters, the secret- Keeping stones, the flowing sky.
Not in marble palaces, not in months, no, nor in ciphers, never touching ground: in weightless, fragile worlds we have lived together. Time was beaten out, but hardly by minutes: one minute was a hundred years, one life, one love. Roofs sheltered us, less than roofs, clouds; less than clouds, heavens; even less, air, nothing. Crossing oceans formed out of twenty tears, ten yours and ten mine, we arrived at the golden beads of a necklace, clear islands, deserted, without flowers, without bodies; a harbor, so tiny, made of glass, for a love that in itself was enough for the largest longing, and we asked neither ships nor time for help. Opening enormous tunnels in grains of sand, we discovered the mines of flames and of chance. And everything hanging from that thread that held up ... what? That's why our life doesn't appear to be lived: slippery, evasive, it left behind neither wakes nor footprints. If you want to remember it, don't look where you always look for traces and recollections. Don't look at your soul, your shadow or your lips. Look carefully into the palm of your hand, it's empty.
<> Pied Piper has lured the children all To no Lollipop Land but wide tall Weeping Wall. From fondle-cheek to hideous hairy prime, Galloping leap across the gap is overnight. Still prattling simple  And verb  The dancing class dress, Sunday School medal for verse, Cigar box with captured toad, the colored stone, And hammock-gaze at cloud to castle grown Will never be known. Piper is the pirate, wicked black-skirted nurse Banishing circus and peanuts, the Punch and Judy stage, Tearing out the tinseled Wishing Well page In deliberate rage; Murdering the birthday cake, causing the presents to dis- appear, Gouging everyone's eyes with the pin from the Donkey Game, Inking the one good cloth, curdling the ice cream: It is no dream; For we were the Piper, now are the Children Dear. Stolen from selves those trivial thrilling hours, And only can be restored what was innocently ours By own trembling weak-kneed powers.
We thought we did so well to leave the house More or less tidy and with no rent owing. We left the place better than some, we said: Minimum fuss without disturbing neighbours, Not enough damage for a landlord's claim And most of our own baggage still the same. Surprising really, how easy in the end It was to settle down in different towns. If moving had not muddled up addresses We would have met to praise ourselves and ask Why on earth had others made such fuss? Couldn't they pack up quietly like us? And then as in the dream when the last step Brings round the end, only to begin Without surprise the whole concern again I found that I was walking past that fence: Had thought I had packed up and quite cleared out But only gone a little way about. I wasn't sure the gas had been turned off I missed my screwdriver, I'd left some books; That incompleted letter might be here. I picked round like a rather stupid thief: Much worse this time to leave and cross the green Since I could never tell you I had been. Then we found we both had business near. We did not see the house, but now and then On separate days acknowledged it was there. We left it well because we never went, Like blood returning to the famished face Seemed to forget we'd ever left the place.
A twelve-year-old with a toasting fork roasts his knuckles on the kitchen grate. Dry crusts, scraped with mutton fat, bubble to an edible grey. The worst storms for a decade crack windows criss-crossed with sticky tape. Coal's &lsquo;non-domestic&rsquo; so Dad's burning slate and back-numbers of  How quickly those prim nudes fade away! On the wireless plays by Eliot and Fry remind us that our betters talk in verse. Night after night we stare, pink-faced, into draughty splutterings, mists, red caves, turning our backs on &lsquo;the world outside&rsquo; and feeding our small lives to the flames.
Stepping in here means the end of carpet. My leading toe locates a tiny lake next to the sink. At least it  but now I hear and feel a clammy trout flap sadly in the shallows. Happiness, I suddenly perceive, is only dry. My life's a foreign mountain, so uphill, translating fuzzy shapes into familiars: I ought to know my teapot, but a scarf of blurry grey wraps it entirely round. My memory knows it to be red and slowly, now I'm staring really hard, I see faint pink ebb into it and then recede, a welcome spurt of paint into the dark. Aboard the drainer, propped in open pose, the tilted biscuit tin's an obscure helmet, vague heart for Elizabeth, mucky continent.
Flow, water, the blue water Little birds of foam Singing on thee O flow, water, blue water Little stars falling asleep To thy tossing O flow, water, the blue water What matters any sorrow It is lost in thee Little times, little men What matters They are safe in thee O Flow, water, blue water All is safe in thee Little birds The shadows of maidens <>
Pods are the poppies, and slim spires of pods  The hollyhocks; the balsam's pearly bredes  Of rose-stained snow are little sacs of seeds Collapsing at a touch; the lote, that sods The pond with green, has changed its flowers to rods  And discs of vesicles; and all the weeds,  Around the sleepy water and its reeds, Are one white smoke of seeded silk that nods. Summer is dead, ay me! sweet Summer 's dead!  The sunset clouds have built her funeral pyre,  Through which, e'en now, runs subterranean fire: While from the East, as from a garden-bed,  Mist-vined, the Dusk lifts her broad moon like some  Great golden melon saying, &ldquo;Fall has come.&rdquo;
Luc&iacute;a enjoyed the mystery, the emerald light captive in the bright belly of  she wore clipped to her home-sewn dress parading like a peacock at the town socials around the reservoir and sugar mill clock. All the se&ntilde;oritas flashed their  live pendants adorning breasts and hearts to compete with the swirl of  for the attention of prime young caballeros in linen  the clock chiming every hour of courting, denying every second of lustful thought in the smolders of raped sugarcane fields. Luc&iacute;a knew nothing of the nerve stimulations, the reactions that produced the bound light of balanced chemicals in glowing abdomens. What she knew was how the male  tracked females by following their flashes; how to trap them in her mother's glass jars in the hours of the early evening before the moon rises strong and snuffs their glow; how to pinch them so they cling to the dress, near the heart, calling attention to the breasts, the green fire silhouetting the spell of nipples. Luc&iacute;a never questioned the cool light nor Alberto when he took her, removed her  said she wouldn't be needing fireflies anymore now that she'd belong to him and his promises. Luc&iacute;a knows how  from Alberto's fingers into infinite green spirals through palm trees and mountains, how soon after the harvest Alberto also disappeared. Luc&iacute;a stares at stars she swears are green, traps  jade oozing between the seams of her fingers, the phenomenon of luminescence in her palms  light without heat, love without love.
What does it mean when I moan &ldquo;I want to go back home&rdquo;? &ldquo;To go back home&rdquo; here means to die and this is why I cry. It means that I am not at home not where I am nor where I come nor anywhere that I can go alive and this is why I cry. Yet I say &ldquo;back&rdquo; as if I knew and once had such a place, but who took me away and when was that? I don't know and it is too late. Do I imagine when I die  and this is why I cry  I will see my son Ready whom I saw on the stretcher bloody?
<> But I cannot tell to you  For they never are apart  Which is better of the two. I am this! I am the other! And the devil is my brother; But my father He is God! And my mother is the Sod! Therefore I am safe, you see, Owing to my pedigree. So I shelter love and hate Like twin brothers in a nest; Lest I find, when it's too late, That the other was the best.
Ethiopia Lift your night-dark face, Abyssinian Son of Sheba's race! Your palm trees tall And your mountains high Are shade and shelter To men who die For freedom's sake  But in the wake of your sacrifice May all Africa arise With blazing eyes and night-dark face In answer to the call of Sheba's race: Ethiopias free! Be like me, All of Africa, Arise and be free! All you black peoples, Be free! Be free!
Sifting flour onto the ground I draw their signs from memory. It's been done before. You want to recognize my prayer:  <> <> <> Listen well. Those sounds crowding the night are gods crossing the seas, reaching me. Watch those shadows lift into music. You want me to dance as easily or sing? Do not expect me to smile. I am not who you think I am. Do you think you can pay to know what I know? The soul travels quickly from a body touched by drums. Shadows burn and the breath stands still outside. And outside myself I see myself dancing, the dove limp in my grip until its head drops free. I circle, and I circle again through blood and rum and limbs no longer mine, nor this voice of steel and drums crying: <> <> Maybe I am Erzilie, that man Ogoun-Feraille, and others Agw&eacute;, Baron Samedi, Damballah, Legba. Our dozen feet rake back into the soil what could have come alive had we really given up ourselves to pigeon blood, or wood coals on flesh. For you we call out any names but the real ones. Perhaps. This is how the gods become us.
The wind hauls out its valued baggage in three steps Tonight, and drops it with some relief In the full dark, in the leaves of an avocado tree. The grass rises to meet it. As always, you, too, rise, and meet them halfway, And nod your head, and accept Their leavings, and give thanks, crumbs For the tablecloth, crumbs for the plate, and wolf them down ... The rivers of air you've filtered and rearranged Since birth, and paid no heed to, Surprise you now, and start to take on The acid and eye of what's clear, That milky message of breath on cold mornings  That what you take in is seldom what you let out.
The hawthorns grew crowded together In what had been the hill-field. I had to cut whole thickets away, Trunk by trunk, before they would fall. The trees were just in bloom. I looked up through their dead-seeming Mesh of twigs at delicate green, White flowers, open sky  O need to make things simple by levelling them! I threw the trees, cut into fragments, On the fire, and watched the green crumple In an instant in the flame.  Later I would find A twig with flower and leaf still intact By the circle of the ash. My harshness was the saw's As it cut through the thicket wall; My pleasure was the neat blankness Of cleared ground. Looking across The shallow curve revealed Where two slopes met I would think, &lsquo;It was impassable; now To cross it is as simple as drawing breath.&rsquo; I would lie down there, Spread out my arms and watch the sky.
A statesman is an easy man, He tells his lies by tote; A journalist makes up his lies And takes you by the throat; So stay at home and drink your beer And let the neighbours vote,     Because this age and the next age Engender in the ditch, No man can know a happy man From any passing wretch, If Folly link with Elegance No man knows which is which,     But actors lacking music Do most excite my spleen, They say it is more human To shuffle, grunt and groan, Not knowing what unearthly stuff Rounds a mighty scene.
I never, today, went on the courts except to angle sharply tremendous bounces and catch the younger men flat. I'm 30. But before each play the little Welshman was stroking in unconscious meditation his swelling prick, this threw me off my game. &ldquo;Hinder!&rdquo; I claimed when my first serve fell short, my second hit him squarely on the spot. &ldquo;Ouch!&rdquo; he says and lays the offender bare. &ldquo;Looks O.K.,&rdquo; say I with expert eyes. &ldquo;Yes, ain't it a beauty?&rdquo; whispers Lloydie. &ldquo;I'd better take you home and fix you up&rdquo;  and I toss in the ball, to their relief, because today I would have scoured the courts like Hector when he set the ships afire. This, this was the birthday present that Aesculapius and Eros gave me and may such a unanimity of joy reward all who forgo the victory and leave the courts of glory on an errand of mercy, and make love instead of war.
the hours rise up putting off stars and it is dawn into the street of the sky light walks scattering poems on earth a candle is extinguishedthe city wakes with a song upon her mouth having death in her eyes and it is dawn the world goes forth to murder dreams.... i see in the street where strong men are digging bread and i see the brutal faces of people contented hideous hopeless cruel happy and it is day, in the mirror i see a frail man dreaming dreams dreams in the mirror and it is duskon earth a candle is lighted and it is dark. the people are in their houses the frail man is in his bed the city sleeps with death upon her mouth having a song in her eye the hours descend, putting on stars.... in the street of the sky night walks scattering poems
O, but I saw a solemn sight; <> Castle Dargan's ruin all lit, Lovely ladies dancing in it. What though they danced! Those days are gone, <> Lovely lady or gallant man Are blown cold dust or a bit of bone. O, what is life but a mouthful of air? <> Yet all the lovely things that were Live, for I saw them dancing there. Nobody knows what may befall, <> I have stood so long by a gap in the wall Maybe I shall not die at all.
To speak my mind, unfold the secrets of the heart, breathe word of it, take soundings in the passage out  even as my hand writes,thumb and fingers hold the pen in attention. My whole life needs to be here to come alive in this consideration. These stars are fragrant and I follow their scent. I am their hunting hound, predator of the marvelous. I try the qualities of the line, mutteringto sound it, divine the ratios,render articulate the actual progress of syllables, keep alive in the sequence of vowels <> song makes. As if from a flower, releasing the music that I sense, a fragrancea colorin mind into a moving pivot of the flood that comes to meand promising makes sense.
<> Trembles for lack of roof Against such quiet things as go On hostile wing or hoof; No deer that stops in open wood Hopes for a cunning wall Between himself and death, or could Conceive of this, at all. But man, who crept in awful fright Of what he sensed and saw, Built him a house wherein he might Escape the raking claw; And now inside his lights go dim And huddle on the floor, And ugly voices come to him From close outside the door. No hawk that sidles down the air Could own such thoughts as teach Of no contentment anywhere Within his taloned reach; No fox that slips through brushwood feels The want of loyal friends, Having himself, and nimble heels To match his separate ends. Man, the brother, alone must sue Always on his own part, Mumbling words of comfort to His uncompanioned heart; But this is fitting doom for him Who built a house with pride And found that there was room for him And only him inside.
Waiting for the end, boys, waiting for the end. What is there to be or do? What's become of me or you? Are we kind or are we true? Sitting two and two, boys, waiting for the end. Shall I build a tower, boys, knowing it will rend Crack upon the hour, boys, waiting for the end? Shall I pluck a flower, boys, shall I save or spend? All turns sour, boys, waiting for the end. Shall I send a wire, boys? Where is there to send? All are under fire, boys, waiting for the end. Shall I turn a sire, boys? Shall I choose a friend? The fit is in the pyre, boys, waiting for the end. Shall I make it clear, boys, for all to apprehend, Those that will not hear, boys, waiting for the end, Knowing it is near, boys, trying to pretend, Sitting in cold fear, boys, waiting for the end? Shall we send a cable, boys, accurately penned, Knowing we are able, boys, waiting for the end, Via the Tower of Babel, boys? Christ will not ascend. He's hiding in his stable, boys, waiting for the end. Shall we blow a bubble, boys, glittering to distend, Hiding from our trouble, boys, waiting for the end? When you build on rubble, boys, Nature will append Double and re-double, boys, waiting for the end. Shall we make a tale, boys, that things are sure to mend, Playing bluff and hale, boys, waiting for the end? It will be born stale, boys, stinking to offend, Dying ere it fail, boys, waiting for the end. Shall we go all wild, boys, waste and make them lend, Playing at the child, boys, waiting for the end? It has all been filed, boys, history has a trend, Each of us enisled, boys, waiting for the end. What was said by Marx, boys, what did he perpend? No good being sparks, boys, waiting for the end. Treason of the clerks, boys, curtains that descend, Lights becoming darks, boys, waiting for the end. Waiting for the end, boys, waiting for the end. Not a chance of blend, boys, things have got to tend. Think of those who vend, boys, think of how we wend, Waiting for the end, boys, waiting for the end.
I SAW the racer coming to the jump,  Staring with fiery eyeballs as he rushed, I heard the blood within his body thump,  I saw him launch, I heard the toppings crushed. And as he landed I beheld his soul  Kindle, because, in front, he saw the Straight With all its thousands roaring at the goal,  He laughed, he took the moment for his mate. Would that the passionate moods on which we ride  Might kindle thus to oneness with the will; Would we might see the end to which we stride,  And feel, not strain, in struggle, only thrill. And laugh like him and know in all our nerves Beauty, the spirit, scattering dust and turves.
His memory was shaped by forgetting Into a snowman, handful by handful; In the end two pebbles for eyes and a cherrywood Pipe clamped in the thinlipped mouth. But was this fellow really his past, This white dummy in a white waste? While the censor works, while the frost holds, Perhaps he will pass but then he will pass. Yesterday was a dance of flakes Waltzing down, around, and up, But today is lull and smudge, today Is a man with a pipe that will not draw. Today is a legless day with head-on Idiot eyes, a stranded deaf Mute in a muted world. This lump Is what he remembered when he forgot, Already beginning to dribble. Tomorrow Comes the complete forgetting, the thaw. Or is it rather a dance of water To replace, relive, that dance of white?
&lsquo;What are the bugles blowin' for?&rsquo; said Files-on-Parade  &lsquo;To turn you out, to turn you out,&rsquo; the Colour-Sergeant said. &lsquo;What makes you look so white, so white?&rsquo; said Files-on-Parade. &lsquo;I'm dreadin' what I've got to watch,&rsquo; the Colour-Sergeant said.  For they're hangin' Danny Deever, you can hear the Dead March play,  The Regiment's in 'ollow square they're hangin' him to-day;  They've taken of his buttons off an' cut his stripes away,  An' they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'. &lsquo;What makes the rear-rank breathe so 'ard?&rsquo; said Files-on-Parade. &lsquo;It's bitter cold, it's bitter cold,&rsquo; the Colour-Sergeant said. &lsquo;What makes that front-rank man fall down?&rsquo; said Files-on-Parade. &lsquo;A touch o' sun, a touch o' sun,&rsquo; the Colour-Sergeant said.  They are hangin' Danny Deever, they are marchin' of 'im round,  They 'ave 'alted Danny Deever by 'is coffin on the ground;  An' 'e'll swing in 'arf a minute for a sneakin' shootin' hound   O they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'! &lsquo;'Is cot was right-'and cot to mine,&rsquo; said Files-on-Parade. &lsquo;'E's sleepin' out an' far to-night,&rsquo; the Colour-Sergeant said. &lsquo;I've drunk 'is beer a score o' times,&rsquo; said Files-on-Parade. &lsquo;'E's drinkin' bitter beer alone,&rsquo; the Colour-Sergeant said.  They are hangin' Danny Deever, you must mark 'im to 'is place,  For 'e shot a comrade sleepin' you must look 'im in the face;  Nine 'undred of 'is county an' the Regiment's disgrace,  While they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'. &lsquo;What's that so black agin the sun?&rsquo; said Files-on-Parade. &lsquo;It's Danny fightin' 'ard for life,&rsquo; the Colour-Sergeant said. &lsquo;What's that that whimpers over'ead?&rsquo; said Files-on-Parade. &lsquo;It's Danny's soul that's passin' now,&rsquo; the Colour-Sergeant said.  For they're done with Danny Deever, you can 'ear the quickstep play,  The Regiment's in column, an' they're marchin' us away;  Ho! the young recruits are shakin', an' they'll want their beer to-day,  After hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'!
I encountered Sikelianos unexpectedly, in the early evening. It was in the bare, ungardened patch around what must have been his house, or summer place, or his museum: shuttered, builders&rsquo; gear all about; a chained goat; a telegraph post with a streetlamp slung from it; Sikelianos on his plinth in that scruffy, peaceful spot, surveying the Gulf of Corinth in the haze below, marble head and shoulders a little grander than human, flushed by the sunset's glance across Delphi's red-tiled roofs. He was one more fact. Not a provocation to any fervour, to any damage. On a side track along the hill there was damage: two bullet-holes, small calibre, crazing the glass front of a shrine, erect kiosk of rusted grey sheet iron, a worn offertory slot under the locked, tended display-case. Which contained, undamaged, a green glass lamp, oil for it in a pop-bottle, a torn-out magazine page with a stained ikon. And another place, below and behind the poet's head, had a cracked gold high-heeled slipper. It was an almost empty grave under the cypresses, cut shallow and dry in the churchyard rock, most recently used, for a short spell, by a woman of the generation of Sikelianos. Nothing left in it but the marker recording her death at ninety, two or three years back, and a plastic posy, some small bones, the shoe. Sikelianos is gathered in, called down from every corner of the air to condense into that shape of marble, rendered to a decent, conceivable size and emitting among the hills a clear quiet sunset tone that owes no further obligation at all to detail, description, the collection of things.
It might have been that he was near death. Certainly foreign languages became easier to understand. One day he felt, looking at the Greek text of the Iliad, that he could in fact read there about fires burning around a war, about stars brittle in the sky jiving under a fine full moon. It was some consolation, like Mahler, or riding a bicycle. Then he could understand even when people werent talking &amp; one day admired a shapely young woman getting out of a car &amp; was suddenly overcome with her grief even before he saw the sick little girl she helped out, &amp; the bleak doctor's doorway beyond the Plymouth. Her shape told me she was sad, he thought, &amp; then he allowed his thought to make love to her &amp; her sadness both while he drove up the highway towards it
Harmattan starts its December howling, hurling grit of the Sahara all around. Don't look to the sky for rescue. Breathe, and you fill up with sand. Run to the woods and the grass has dried. Those baobab trees are the squat arms of grandfathers poking from their graves, some hands waving us out to play, some holding back the brown fog from the blue. It's no trick, no delicate mirage. Screech like a hawk when your feet won't move, nobody hears you, and roaches big as thumbs come crumbing at your toes, the ants to dance. Stay where you are, grow round and down. Remember your father's cough, the hacking phlegm, your uncle's South brown teeth? Ever wonder why fingers crook where they come from? It's your turn to sun burn. Just don't let them catch you combing desert dust from your hair.
Nothing can ruin the evening   car doors slammed, voices raised in the last of the light, voices  without owners. And that's a difference between art and nature   art transforming voices, traffic tawdriness but in a gathering-in  an almost selfish motion; nature extending outwards as the shore its arms  night its stars, an open invitation. The palace of a ship at night  blinking stars like cursors; those disembodied voices from  who knows which shore, drunk  why note them, fail them?  Torn between life and art, why is one without the other like a shore without its sea  night without its stars, why am I  still beautiful so unable to contain  the ugliness, my own, in either?
Bringing their lifethese young bringing their liferise from their wakings bringing their lifecome to a place where they make their gifts The grapes of life of deathof transformation round they hang at handdesireslike peace or seed of revolutions that make all things new and must be lived out, washed in rivers, and themselves made new and bringing their lifethe youngthey reach in their griefstheir mistakestheir discovering bringing their lifethey touchthey take bringing their lifethey come to a place It is raining firethey are bringing their life their sex speaks for themtheir ideas all speak their acts arrivebringing their life entire They resist a system of wars and rewards They offer their open facesthey offer their bodies They offer their handsbringing their life entire They offer their lifethey are their own gifts Make liferesistresistmake life Bringing their life entirethey come to this moment Bringing their life entirethey come to this place
On other cloudy afternoons You will be sitting here, or pacing The rooms, your restless words Unuttered. I put you there now So the drama may continue, with poplars Invoking the wind outside, the lamplight Slowly focusing to a pencil point. Here, it is murdering an angel In the very center of everywhere. This same Joy shall be yours, drawing the blood out Among these mazes that continue Always, under the aspects Of a cloudy day. Mysterious the mazes Of those afternoons through which The red leaves sweep, your own hand Tracing joyfully there another life To live you on afternoons like this.
We used to sacrifice young girls, killing them like does on rocky altars they themselves had kept tidy as kitchens. Moloch took babies, picked them early from their mother's limbs like green fruit, spat out the pits. It always was for some necessity, fat harvest, rain, wind for a flaccid ocean, sails flapping like gulls' wings towards Troy. Now we give young men. They dance as delicately as any bull boy, with bayonet, in a green maze, under a sky as hot as Crete.
Slowly the sea grows pale, and the sun grows more precise, Shrinking into its slimmer contours, its fear makes us afraid. The gold in the dying sky dies slowly to silver but what, More horribly, is happening in the flattened sea? Like a frightened cat it crouches, sleek and slightly arched, The changing lights betray the churning hidden bowels, A slow sick swell, the tension in the falling line of foam. What of us, when our blue and boastful sea lies so unnerved? The silver sun is yellow, now the yellow sun is green: the sky No longer alight, now the sky is heavy and near. The thick air sighs, And the light around us slowly moulders but what, More dreadful, mercifully distant, happens beneath the sea's tight skin? Not now the enamelled lido, with its brown and holiday bodies, The confident beach, with the clipped claws of the breaking wave. But a thick green swirl, it seems, of rotted bodies, putrescent cream  All the dead of the great seas, gathered together here, still inarticulate? And then in the falling darkness the flying sand is annulled, Only our cheeks still sting a little, a little grit between the teeth: The street lamps all burst out, dim yet stronger than that great defeated sun, And across the mollified waters the pathways of gold grow firm.
This morning, as if striping the lower field were not enough, sun flooded the south windows at an angle, dissolving the glass dividing the plants inside from plants outside where almost all that blooms is blooming. So finally I opened all the doors, unstoppered the upstairs windows and swept away the delicate crisp husks of flies, the dark accumulation of the winter. And now you're splashing the children with the hose, urging me out into the sun, as I sit in the shade of the porch under the eaves where spiders do their work  symmetrical hammocks and flannel sacks of eggs. Have you noticed they always move in increments, from bush to tree to post: even when they fly, they fall on a tether or make a lateral swing in the wind unlike birds, light-bellied swallows with forked tails and ruddered swifts, descending from the barn in open air, free-fall, snatching flies on the wing summer calls us to be birds, calls us to abandon. When Orpheus heard the mermaids sing, he sang louder. It's right that I wait here with the spiders growing larger, slower, shrewder at the target's edge.
Said hermit monk to hermit monk,  &lsquo;Friend, in this island anchorage Our life has tranquilly been sunk  From pious youth to pious age, &lsquo;In such clear waves of quietness,  Such peace from argument or brawl That one prime virtue I confess  Has never touched our hearts at all. &lsquo;Forgiveness, friend! who can forgive  But after anger or dissent? This never-pardoning life we live  May earn God's blackest punishment.&rsquo; His friend, resolved to find a ground  For rough dispute between the two That mutual pardons might abound,  With cunning from his wallet drew A curious pebble of the beach  And scowled, &lsquo;This treasure is my own&rsquo;: He hoped for sharp unfriendly speech  Or angry snatching at the stone. But honeyed words his friend outpours,  &lsquo;Keep it, dear heart, you surely know Even were it mine it still were yours,  This trifle that delights you so.&rsquo; The owner, acting wrath, cries, &lsquo;Brother,  What's this? Are my deserts so small You'd give me trifles?&rsquo; But the other  Smiles, &lsquo;Brother, you may take my all.&rsquo; He then enraged with one so meek,  So unresponsive to his mood, Most soundly smites the martyr cheek  And rends the island quietude. The martyr, who till now has feigned  In third degree of craftiness That meekness is so deep ingrained  No taunt or slight can make it less, Spits out the tooth in honest wrath,  &lsquo;You hit too hard, old fool,&rsquo; cried he. They grapple on the rocky path  That zigzags downward to the sea. In rising fury strained and stiff  They lunge across the narrow ground; They topple headlong from the cliff  And murderously embraced are drowned. Here Peter sits: two spirits reach  To sound the knocker at his Gate. They shower forgiveness each on each,  Beaming triumphant and elate. But oh, their sweats, their secret fears  Lest clod-souled witnesses may rise To set a tingling at their ears  And bar the approach to Paradise!
Our rooms await us again in our friend's wild country, So now, as in autumns past, having spent the year alone, you'll gather the fruits of your study, and trundle down the path from your island cave, go to Athens, and book a fast ship to join us in talk ... where we, the candles stinking, our friend's despotic eyes glazed from wine and bad conscience, will thrash out the evils of the day. But this time, consider a long vacation. The news from Athens isn't the best so I hear, and there are prospects more dreary than drunken intellectuals and their games, the endless verses, the garlands tossed at you by men like me in so many ways your junior. What's to gain by returning to rogues, men cowed by success and disaster? Are you so keen on following the story? Do you still plan to cop the first-prize at your age? And even if they don't haul you into court, what of the body on its slow rack  you a soldier who campaigned for four decades? Besides, you say your tongue's gone listless, and you can only think right and do wrong. You remember your past affections as ailments  the old friends in their foolish postures. Compassion comes hardest when it's too late  the players exhausted, broken down  when hatred's spent and a regard for what happened has run its course even in frauds like me. Go back to Athens, impervious. But they will kill you. Myself, I have my excuse handy: middle-aged shame. Inform the company, should you visit, that my old failure in battle I knew it was all lost  comes to haunt me with unusual vehemence. Need I spell out again the time and the place, and the numbers of men and ships I squandered, that Poseidon took in without ceremony? It's too tempting a topic: to let Thucydides off the hook, when he might better choke on his lapses in solitude  in this rude hut on this unforgiving coast.
Amazing! a man who grieved for his father as I grieved for a son. He would gladly have leapt into the grave, changed places. And I, who always had a hollow all through my chest instead of a father, stand amazed, impressed as if at a grave's edge, I who heard my father like many another had died. But only one son ever dies. Immeasurable grief swims the seas, all whales. Never a minnow swims out in that salt, where there's pain beyond belief, and no relief.
No Austin-Seven at my door love's chariot was, but jolting trams with butts and spittle on the floor conveyed your peerless hams. I could not buy great gems to rest like moons or blood against your flesh, nor softly cloud your moonlight breast in silken, star-shot mesh. I owned no marble throne to raise your grace above the stumbling crowd; no vast horned herds had I at graze to make your passion proud. But a spontaneous species browsed the bosky pasture of my groins, begotten when great Sol caroused in Taurus and my loins. These, my sole subject creatures, thrive beneath majestic thumb-nail law. All mildly live and kindly wive, except the glutton jaw. So for the tribute Beauty drew, outflowering from her calyx, frock, I could pay but one pregnant ewe, the fairest of that flock. She: that pet so cherished for your sake clings at the very root of me and sucks its nurse awake. He: we may the better judge our fate, and learn if past these sensual jars our inmost selves may mate. From the vexed House the Crab controls, see! our twin destinies remove, and reach as manumitted souls the Balance of true love. She: Dearest! my novice ardour fails. Can't we assay love's richness here? Let my breast be the Scales!
High meadow: poppy blots mazily responsory to our star's impress, clappers in fire's bell after swinging, still blurry in the ear's labyrinth, while dry shadow trances the moist floor of air, weedy, a beetle fencing with the ant to sever him and the fragrance of his track. Ivy twines a column, girds it to carry it through close heats burning closer  has not forgotten rupture from below, can infuse fibers of flowing rock into far architecture while hanging into dwindling clamors of fife, drum, yell ... rout has tumbled through, and will, while lattices cool in the interval: elixir and alloy fade white past the ford, foaming trace of a vessel that pours further, its rim a home for broken column rotting trunk and spindle of the jay's cry, something heard: ivied, spiralled, embittered. A final runner's crashings dim around that rhythm he runs for, dulled tumult of his will a winking sea pressed in its bed. And that other who fell, extinguished? Augustine wept over Dido, the hymn writer had Saint Paul weeping at Virgil's tomb, but has the female soul been widowed by her ashen husband of foundations? Through this hot salt, honey of clarity, the distilled engendering of bees.
<> the island's low arch insinuates as would a self-easing breastbone while the boat's diesels splutter. A phrase in the broken, hieratic rhythms of the beyond. Henceforth? Where Strabo cleared weeds and hoed herbs cataloguing them, ranging them in hexameters. Spared, it may be, from awkward visions. Speared like straight seed into plain labor including his futile letters to the brother kings. <> <> Under that memory runs the deaf river, shifts in the bloody shores, rearrangements of unsheltered ground. But I am the island, lifted out for how long O Lord to hold into flows reddened or sunned, and to breathe your starry eclipses equally with the days of your standing. I am island and worker beneath its arches and digger, shy of your wrath, hoer to not go astray.
Summertime Is warm and bright, With light-bugs At night. Autumn time Is not so sunny, But Halloween Is funny. Winter Changes most of all, Bright, then gray, Then snowflakes fall. But Spring I like the very best When birds come back To nest. Also in the Springtime rain Flowers start To bloom again.
Their high pitched baying as if in prayer's unison remote, undistracted, given over utterly to belief, the skein of geese voyages south, hierarchic arrow of its convergence toward the point of grace swinging and rippling, ribbon tail of a kite, loftily over lakes where they have not elected to rest, over men who suppose earth is man's, over golden earth preparing itself for night and winter. We humans are smaller than they, and crawl unnoticed, about and about the smoky map.
Eve, swinging her dusky limbs disconsolate Strayed down the hill, crushing the silken moss, Shaking the heath-bells down with her petulant gait. The rosy periwinkles that clustered and leaned across Were broken against her thighs; she shattered the hibiscus with her  hands And scattered with her hair clouds of pale mimosa sands. Eve, alone, unsatisfied, among the orange and guava trees Hungry, and discontent in the fruitful shade Drifted, with the blood of the flowers on her feet and knees, With her suave form dusty with spices, honey sweet, strayed Into the gloom-woven forest, where the birds and cicalas were still, Where the blue crabs rustled, in quest of her aimless will. Eve, pushing the festooned vanilla trembling aside, Looked where the red fruit hung like coals of fire, Overhead the reddest. She lifted her long arms and tried To pull down the bough; the leaves broke, and the fruit swung higher, But pressing her supple body into the cool dark leaves  Her breasts uplifted in endeaver she touches she reeves. Eve, with her resistless, virgin-budded breast, Has brought down a ripe fruit heavily to her feet Its cool weight lay full on her bosom; now it rolls to rest Forgotten in the grass. Eva, fearful and fleet Runs into the shadow with her capture; a few little bites are enough; Her fruit is unripe and her soft mouth is bitter and rough. Eve, running with swift limbs quickened by dread Presses her hand to her bosom where the fruit has lain. Eve, with a heart of resentment, is quickly sped. The mouth of the man is full of the taste of pain; Strong, with eyes of defiance, Eve walks into Sorrows: Out of Eden, weary with the wistfulness of her silent tomorrows.
Everyone looked and, passing, revealed himself  by the light of her hair heavy upon her shoulders  the haggard drunk holding onto the backs of the seats, face tense of a fixed purpose toward the toilet  the savage-looking female wearing a picture hat and  mascara, hard eyes. And the two colored women: an older in a small beret and a younger in slicked glossy hair sitting, for protection and with side-  long looks, close to her friend all were affected as she turned frightened to address me, pitifully alone.
She was the wilderness in me The secret solitary place Where grow the healing herbs. We had recognized each other Years ago; the bond was deep. Now since her death Two seasons ago The landscape is ghostly. No small black and gold panther Steals through the long grasses And pounces on a mouse. No one curls up on the terrace wall Gathering the day together. No round shadow sits on my sill Late at night, waiting to be let in, And then in one jump comes to lie beside me, A long pillow of purrs along my back. Distant, passionate one, I miss you in my bones. I miss you like my heartbeat. I have mourned you for nine months. What does not leave me Is your great luminous eye Open to its golden rim, The darkness so dark, the deepness so deep there I wanted to go with you to death But in a few seconds The needle did its good work. You had gone  And in a new time I grow old without you. It is all very still now, The grief washed out.
If a man rinses his hands in volcanic glass, he touches me; I hasten to him. My body, my pumice and glass, fills itself with blood and rocking: the mulberry immured on the crow's split tongue warbled in its mouth beside its unmusical cries. Mulberry: pellet, bright stain, terse memo tied in the crow's love knot of primeval beak. This is how I moved: a wine glass stung to a false hum as once I saw my mother woo a song to surface with wet fingers swayed around a crystal rim. I said to him, do you like the taste of red cedar and acorn, black alder, beechnut and elderberry?
Gassing the woodchucks didn't turn out right. The knockout bomb from the Feed and Grain Exchange was featured as merciful, quick at the bone and the case we had against them was airtight, both exits shoehorned shut with puddingstone, but they had a sub-sub-basement out of range. Next morning they turned up again, no worse for the cyanide than we for our cigarettes and state-store Scotch, all of us up to scratch. They brought down the marigolds as a matter of course and then took over the vegetable patch nipping the broccoli shoots, beheading the carrots. The food from our mouths, I said, righteously thrilling to the feel of the .22, the bullets' neat noses. I, a lapsed pacifist fallen from grace puffed with Darwinian pieties for killing, now drew a bead on the littlest woodchuck's face. He died down in the everbearing roses. Ten minutes later I dropped the mother. She flipflopped in the air and fell, her needle teeth still hooked in a leaf of early Swiss chard. Another baby next. O one-two-three the murderer inside me rose up hard, the hawkeye killer came on stage forthwith. There's one chuck left. Old wily fellow, he keeps me cocked and ready day after day after day. All night I hunt his humped-up form. I dream I sight along the barrel in my sleep. If only they'd all consented to die unseen gassed underground the quiet Nazi way.
<> I would go on holiday To a place where children run Happy-hearted in the sun: Where there are no bounds at all Of hedge or stream or garden wall: No teacher, priest, or magistrate To scowl beside a bolted gate: Where no man could in his pocket Stick a sunny field and lock it: Where a draper wouldn't grin Sickly when you ventured in: Where a sage is never tied To the grocer at his side: Where a man might work as gay As a baby at his play: Where a thought and act would be As a man and woman free:  There, if I might have my way, I would go on holiday.
Standin' by de lonesome riverside After de boat's done gone, Po' weary me Won't be nobody's bride Cause I is long gone wrong. Standin' by de weary riverside When de boat comes in, Po' lonesome me Won't meet nobody Cause I ain't got no friend. By de edge o' de weary riverside Night-time's comin' down. Ain't nothin' for a ruined gal But jump overboard an' drown. O, de lonesome riverside, O, de wicked water. Damn ma black old mammy's soul For ever havin' a daughter.
One more day gone, done, found in the form of days. It began, it ended was forward, backward, slow, fast, a sun shone, clouds, high in the air I was for awhile with others, then came down on the ground again. No moon. A room in a hotel to begin again.
Little ragamuffin, brat, a craving for Sen-Sen as we walked along the  it is all that interests you. I remain quiet and my manner annoys you; I'm present and unaccounted for. The tunnels are not crowded in this part of the city. Finally I say I like dogs, possible dogs, worn thin. We're in the wrong place, our favorite season. Ill luck has surfaced again and you do as you please. I hang on to you around the corner. There is something lacking even now. Come, whitewash my fasting worth. Something living touched me; a plant? You pretend to recognize old friends. Why this embarrassed despair, this recoiling? City of Love I can't breathe. Our own God gave us, gave us the bird. Goodbye.
it is a satisfaction a joy to have one of those in the house when she takes a bath she unclothes herself she is no Venus I laugh at her an Inca shivering at the well the sun is  glad of a fellow to marvel at the birds and the flowers  look in
My morning walk witnessed a death. Crossing the road, a hen was swept aside by a passing car. I held my breath. A host of crows came upon the corpse. They flapped their wings and cawed to celebrate the event. Chance had offered them an early gift Their day was well begun, mine cursing fate  indifferent why it gives or takes away.
There is no rest where weary mortals dwell, There is no peace where sorrow bides the time, Save in love's boundless arms, where rise and swell Life's fairest moments into hours sublime. Here where men, weeping, spend a passing day, See one grand sun-set and its after-glow, Feel a brief passion, then the heart's decay, God rest me as I stand beneath the blow. Send to my heart a purging flame of love, Suaging my tears with its consuming fire, Whelm me with passion that shall never rove Save to the beckon of my love's desire. For love I crave tho follows grief amain  A fleeting moment from an hour of pain.
Some clung in pairs or groups of three and small ones seemed to nurse spray ends of baby's breath or Queen Anne's lace or purple barbs of thistle dried. Some were caught in spider webs. A few were acrobats in mid-air vaulting still or frozen where disaster struck. Others curled like embryos glazed and kept, transcended death by nursing silence and dry unyielding breasts of stone. All were glued together in this field of loss  as if the wind had sucked all moisture out, blasted with one storm the last fine ichor of their lives, left this field a charnel house. The glow of liquid conchy pearl was chalk, dry and crumbled in the hand. Hulls of snails seemed poised penitents awaiting flight, rescue, their hollowed insides glowing. They await a fire to come. Their crawling passions led just to this  high home that hums lifeless in the sun, hush of noon's heat. And what survives makes stone that all bone in due time joins. Dead stuff, no more! And yet these hollowed tiny friends of chalk one day at dusk saved me.
What are the major men? All men are brave. All men endure. The great captain is the choice Of chance. Finally, the most solemn burial Is a paisant chronicle. Men live to be Admired by men and all men, therefore, live To be admired by all men. Nations live To be admired by nations. The race is brave. The race endures. The funeral pomps of the race Are a multitude of individual pomps And the chronicle of humanity is the sum Of paisant chronicles. The major men  That is different. They are characters beyond Reality, composed thereof. They are The fictive man created out of men. They are men but artificial men. They are Nothing in which it is not possible To believe, more than the casual hero, more Than Tartuffe as myth, the most Moli&egrave;re, The easy projection long prohibited. The baroque poet may see him as still a man As Virgil, abstract. But see him for yourself, The fictive man. He may be seated in A caf&eacute;. There may be a dish of country cheese And a pineapple on the table. It must be so.
It's Elva I think of tonight, God of the maimed, the hump-backed, sway-backed, that woman whose blood followed her everywhere, the blind man's white planets where there might have been eyes, all that twisted flesh, miracle of metamorphosis, binding and unbinding its sheets at the public bath, left to tell and not tell of the heart: Oh knot of heart that will not be untied And not speaking, speaking, the stump a mouth, the mouth convulsing the air along a dusty road, a crying out unto the rooftops at sunset, the swallows faltering, wing and heartbeat pinning the sky, without need, without fault, without guilt or guile. God by whom this woman dwelt all her days in two rooms with a man dying inward slowly of the booze and a busted gut, and when he died without a wallet in the VA, she called him by name, cried out if he knew the hurled half-empty glass, the steady downpour of wrath, was something other than this: love twisted into the flesh of rage. And who herself not six months later, lay down in a warm bath and read a borrowed romance that wouldn't tell of wristbone, backbone buckled with age, lay down and heard her own heart rend in half and wasn't found until the next day while the waters rose and spilled from a private grave: Oh knot of heart that cannot be untied So her one remaining relative told me on an afternoon in December when the swallow nests were covered with snow, and the wind howled the temple down, my body rocking itself into the night. And now it is you God of the broken-backed, the white-eyed bleeders and screamers, those multiple shapes which the body breathes, whose hand holds the sparrow's thin throat, which shape do you take? From out of what mouth making its slow way down Jerusalem's streets have we heard your cry?
I have a demon and her name is     WEE WIFEY I caught her in a demon trap the household of my skull I pinched her by her heel throughout her wily transformations until  she confessed    her name indeed to be WEE WIFEY and she was out to do me ill. So I made great gestures like Jehovah: dividing land from sea, sea from sky,     my own self from WEE WIFEY ( Now I watch her like a dolly keep an eye,   and mourn her: For she and I are angry&sol;cry     because we love each other dearly. It's sad to note    that without     WEE WIFEY I shall live long and lonely as a tossing cork.
Cold ground and colder stone Unearthed in ruined passageways, The parodies of buildings in the snow  Snow tossed and raging through a world It imitates, that drives forever north To what is rumored to be Spring. To see the faces you had thought were put away Forever, swept like leaves among the crowd, Is to be drawn like them, on winter afternoons, To avenues you saw demolished years before. The houses still remain like monuments, Their windows cracked, For Sale signs on the lawns. Then grass upon those lawns again! and dogs In fashion twenty years ago, the streets mysterious Through summer shade, the marvelous worlds Within the world, each opening like a hand And promising a constant course. You see yourself, A fool with smiles, one you thought dead. And snow is raging, raging, in a darker world.
If you can't finance it undercover, you needn't apply for the gig of lover. To stake this whittled down version of love you don't need money so much as time, attention &amp; all the me the mind can see. Still, moments turn up with dulling precision when the heads or tails of your nighttime thereness must be flipped to recall your daytime awayness; no win, no lose, just edgily the blues. As money needs spenders &amp; spenders need lenders, so passionate romance seems always in need of love, back-talk &amp; deliberated speed.
I feel a mortal isolation Wrap each lovely limb in desolation, Sight, hearing, all Suffer a fall. I see the pretty fields and streams, I hear Beasts calling and birds singing, oh not clear But as a prisoner Who in a train doth pass And through the glass Peer; Ah me, so far away is joy, so near. Break, break the glass, you say? These thoughts are but a mood Blow them away, go free? They are my whole soul's food. Ghost's food! Sepulchral aliment! Thou sleekst in me Death's tegument And so art bent To do, and this I know. Yet there are days, oh brief, When thought's caught half-asleep (Most merrily) and drowsing Set in a meadow browsing. Ah then, like summer breeze in lovely trees That comes in little pants unequally, Or like the little waves of summer seas That push and fuss In heaven knows what sort of busyness, Idly, idly, my thoughts bring me to sleep, On sunny summer day, to sleep. In sun I fall asleep. But I must wake and wake again in pain Crying to see where sun was once all dust and stain As on a window pane  All, all is isolation And every lovely limb's a desolation.
Is it sanity dawning after a long dishevelled night when you lay coughing, hot and cold in a swaddle of blankets while each hour shoved its ugly face into yours and owls ringed the dark? The slow thinning of the greywhite fabric hung across the park into a backdrop that's a luminous blue, the way sipping tea loosens the pincer grip that's locked your throat? Is it Chopin swirling from the transistor that mazurka you practised all those years ago when you retreated from rooms where voices scratched, clashed? Remembering your velvet music teacher's words: &lsquo;Don't jump wrists: movement must always be curved&rsquo;? How the dead family house telescopes into your own home as furniture, faces, defeat, dissolve in runs and leaps of notes? Tissues scrunched and strewn over the bedroom floor, messy as emotion is it that? Removing the stale nightdress, the vest of sweat turning to shiver, lowering the weak frame through steam that magically clears nose, ears? Is it the kindness of water, a blessing beyond everything but the moment of interleaving body, mind with the one who knows your terrible dimensions? Simple as stopping, is it? A sudden refusal to cram time like a shopping bag, staying instead in the window bay to watch the noisy geese flap in formation past the viaduct, past the crimson sun hooked in a tree's claws? The way those three wrapped figures stride over the stiff playing-field grass in the wake of a dog rushing towards a speck in the squander of light  the stillness after?
I bore my baby in my arms through the night like the cantor the Torah dressed in silk I used as a boy to look at critically. But his choir sang large chords, as his figure swung along. Go to sleep now, daughter, I am old and very tired carrying you late. Your father too needs to be comforted. &ldquo;I give you good advice,&rdquo; he used to sing, &ldquo;do not forsake my law. She is the tree of life for those who cleave to her, her ways are pleasant ways and all their windings peace.&rdquo;
Over and over these nights I dream of horses. Sometimes I'm walking the known lane home to find them standing, immovable giants blocking my way. No creak of brass or harness. No stamping hoof. Bronze beasts in a museum, gold flanks flowing in a still compliance, each head curved over another's neck, and past the mass of them the house-lights gleaming. I remember beautiful boys on the road from school shouldering courage between them, beast in check but only just, and my heart beating too fast for love and fear of them. In the cool dawn I'm stark awake. You're dead to the world blocking my way to somewhere with your sleeping gold.
Here is a tale for infants and old nurses: There was a man who gathered rags; and peddled: Who lived alone: with no one ever meddled: And this old man was very fond of verses. His house, a ruin, so the tale rehearses; A hovel over-run of rats and vermin; Not fit for beast to live in. (Like a sermon Embodying misery and hell and curses.) There, one grey dawn of rain and windy weather, They found him dead; starved; o'er a written paper; Beside a dim and half-expiring taper: It was a play, the poor fool'd put together, Of gnomes and fairies, for his own sad pleasure: And folks destroyed it, saying, &ldquo;
Every year they come for the Head Teacher's conference: Henry with his skeleton, George with his leg. This used to be the big house, all the big windows facing away from the pit, down the formal gardens. Now they use it for courses, the Authority. This year, George has put his leg into a purple tracksuit bottom. Last year it was a fishnet stocking. Every year Henry sits the skeleton next to him at dinner. It stares ahead as they discuss the National Curriculum. I clear away the plates. Last night Henry took his skeleton out and sat it on a bench in the grounds; an ambulance screamed along the motorway. George's leg hung from a window. I went home. I live in the village. My husband wanted us to make love but I said No. Not even if I wear my boots? he said. No, I said, not even if you wear your boots. My husband works in a sportswear factory. Anything since the pit shut, he says. Tonight I will wear a single fishnet stocking and I will ask him to wear his purple tracksuit, just the bottoms. He stole the tracksuit from work under his coat with NCB on the back. I can feel my bones under my skin. My husband will not wear his tracksuit. In London men in suits slam doors shut and put files back in cabinets. Lights go out. Schools close. George sleeps with his leg. Henry hugs his skeleton close. So close. My husband tugs on his boots and I look over the motorway to where the pit used to be. I try to shield my breasts from the noise of the boots. My nipples will soon be very sore.
The world that was, the glass King King King King of fashion burst in your eyes sanitation men all the green over the arm what's experience, these ... passing time trudgingthe newspaper looks ahead opens to jaws academic my dear the visibilitysomething that can happen doesand the poor wife couldn't eat supper how to assemble anythingwith flowers in the hair some kind of accident Nobel big shot on the bus these years backwith the simple songthe heart smokethe air outdoors clouds turn ever shoot somebody?  doll in a mini-skirt I ran her over arms smashed light what you think of the garbagemen nesting under the blue eave Nothingact- u- al- ly some great fognoise in the head I could perform
the running of, brown &amp; black burnt mutton under the vine grapes before harvest rub with oil burnt horn oil man flesh blue sky an epic formula, the voices down by the sea measuring salt spotted green olives ripe black, grey snakeskin of the tree no lakes except the all-lake was the sea the blue sea &amp; the burnt vine where we have been wet together &amp; dwelled (held) in the dark sea, we bear the impress of our land a god runs here becoming again the coin &amp; the stamping press the face &amp; the die
<> Sought for much after that, it will be found Either to have gone groping underground (And taken with it all the Hyla breed That shouted in the mist a month ago, Like ghost of sleigh-bells in a ghost of snow)  Or flourished and come up in jewel-weed, Weak foliage that is blown upon and bent Even against the way its waters went. Its bed is left a faded paper sheet Of dead leaves stuck together by the heat  A brook to none but who remember long. This as it will be seen is other far Than with brooks taken otherwhere in song. We love the things we love for what they are.
No in-between. The news is good or bad and hard to write in a neutral hand  died of exposure, 4 A.M., 40 yards from home  body not recovered cause not ascertained  wed, church of Scotland 19 and 22. Cold in words. Flat in lasting ink. Some come elated, the sad long history of Scotland shed for the moment. Some come heavy with recent loss and with that dignity they took from Celtic stone. You write it down. Below, the Rha and Conon enter the bay. You try to catch the hum of their steady entry beyond the choked phrase, the bridal smile. You write it down, the way it has to be for the record, the way it has to be.
Red as old plant pots, tall As the reach of the scrag-arm creeper, The bricks of the wall (Greened and grained with moss) Bar the yard from the street. Blue slate flags Lay cracks of black that cross In a pattern and puzzle for feet, And rag-tag tiles, Up-ended in a row, Hold soil where daffodils And  Outside, clouds Explode and condense again; The Baptist Chapel steeple shakes Under a gravel of rain; The sea regurgitates its dead, And the horizon breaks With earth-spouts and water-quakes. But here where soot and tea-leaves Fertilize the ferns, And the pale-green butterfly Arranges her chess-set of eggs; Where starlings boil on the eaves, And tits with rubber-coated legs Wire themselves to the clothes-pegs  Here let the Holy Child Eena-meena-mumble words That make the wild Wind creep like a sheep-dog. And let His lifted fingers Magnetize the feet of birds, And His bright knees run Round leaf and latch and dust-bin Till zinc, rust and window-box shine  eye to eye with the sun.
It is not through weeping, but all evening the pale blue eye on your most photogenic side has kept its own unfathomable tide. Like the boy at the dyke I have been there: held out a huge finger, lifted atoms of dust with the point of a tissue and imagined slivers of hair in the oil on the cornea. We are both in the dark, but I go on drawing the eyelid up by its lashes, folding it almost inside-out, then finding and hiding every mirror in the house as the iris, besieged with the ink of blood rolls back into its own orbit. Nothing will help it. Through until dawn you dream the true story of the boy who hooked out his eye and ate it, so by six in the morning I am steadying the ointment that will bite like an onion, piping a line of cream while avoiding the pupil and in no time it is glued shut like a bad mussel. Friends call round and mean well. They wait and whisper in the air-lock of the lobby with patches, eyewash, the truth about mascara. Even the cats are on to it; they bring in starlings, and because their feathers are the colours of oil on water in sunlight they are a sign of something. In the long hours beyond us, irritations heal into arguments. For the eighteenth time it comes to this: the length of your leg sliding out from the covers, the ball of your foot like a fist on the carpet while downstairs I cannot bring myself to hear it. Words have been spoken; things that were bottled have burst open and to walk in now would be to walk in on the ocean.
The humiliation of being constantly observed by a hostile or derisive eye is certainly no joke but neither is not being able to find your shoes The rich buy themselves out of it The bus plunges through the rain a full load of long faces stares out the window into the historical ontology of itself
His face is everywhere: a slab of paste, Dabbed forelock, hot pale eyes. His lair Is a wild nest of burnt metal, shadows, But I know a good-luck works between my fingers In Granny's brooch, the soft red-leather Kipling Where his black-magic cross stands gold and upright Or swings its level arms over its shoulders. Its firework cartwheels on his wooden sleeve Into the pages of a million schoolbooks As he strikes air rigid with his quivering fingers, Brooding impossible rages with a tongue That skids unbraking over the crackled ether. His flat hand launches out his throbbing arrows, Flung through classroom dust and the long nights When scuttle helmets bob in rows before him, The banners dip, the oily torches flare, The high goose-steppers kick the air aside. Tiring, he twists his fingers in his mouth, Blows out his brains, dowses himself in petrol, Blazes himself away, runs wild with Eva, Blondi, All the cold wolves who stuck to him like glue And slavered to pull down the sun and moon. Now, he shrinks to a well-practised doodle, A dead thing which thrills my poking fingers. When I peer at the cracks between the clouds I know his fleets will rise to his command, Their crushed bones hauled and straightened from the tomb, The cowlicked skulls perched in their greenhouse cabins Blinding their way across the sulky ocean. In the School Dining Hall I take my Spam And cut it to a neat, pink swastika. I eat it slowly; it is his communion.
It was the little thing you cared about, the sparrow the cat had in its mouth, that same nice muzzle we nuzzle when it's sour sweet from yesterday's milk and we say meow meow and it says nothing, our bulky hands awkward under its withers, a cat looking at us and the bird is dead. What is the connection? Everything is as it is, and nothing as it seems. The sorrow of music, how it hurts the hours we hear this piano through, years, decades even since anything made this kind of sense. <> is love, the kind of love you feel when you've finally touched each other deeply and often enough and it's time to come and come together if you can and go to sleep riding out on the dark billow of wonder that it is this one you're with and no other, this one out of all the whole dream.
The action runs left to right, cavalry, the water-skiers  then a 5-hour film,  a man sleeping for five hours (in fifteen sequences), sleeping left to right, left to right cavalry, a love scene, elephants. Also the world goes left to right, the moon and all the stars, sex too and newspapers, catastrophe. In bed, my wives are to my left. I embrace them moving left to right. I have lived my life that way, growing older, moving eastward  the speedometer, the bank balance architecture, good music. All that is most real moves left to right, declares my friend the scenarist, puffing on a white cigar, eating The  My life is a vision, a mechanism that runs from left to right. I have lived badly. Water-skier, I was until recently in the U.S. Cavalry. Following that I played elephant to a lead by Tarzan. Later, I appeared in a film called  Till today, standing on the edge of things, falling and about to fall asking, Why? I look back. Nowhere. Meanwhile, one or more wives go on stilts for the mail.
Storm and disorder and the giant emotions, The seven deadly sins, they scatter all my hope. To gather them in change I summon up the image Of all arrangement in equilibrium. Moments of poise in the middle of madness; Sharpened as a forest is sharpened by fire, I mean destroyed. O abstract jealousy, half angel and half bird, The bird smashing itself on the lighthouse's flying eye. Tonight able at last to imagine perfect love  Out of all murders midnight in desire. Now in a twilight moment I summon up twilight, The two illuminations that can tell Nothing in any second by themselves  Only the body's knowledge, many fresh mornings, Newborn experience says this flicker of air Over the face, this time's quick light is dawn. I think too of a longhanded mime of form, A dancer carrying two great eggs, intricacies Of music and equilibrium:the boy A Javanese temple-dancer, thin-fingered, dancing Turret-crowned, in his dark hands balancing The eggs. Come back to me soon. You are my breath and wine. Did we then wrestle as if we were our angels? There is peace also, love changing like religion. Around your image now my prodigal wishes Gather in, like the eye's color in brightened rooms, Contract like a cloud of birds about a tree.
I beseech Thee, Lady of Sorrows, look down on my misery. I am but love, I know nothing else. The gates of hell yawn beyond the curtain. I beseech Thee, Lady of Sorrows, at our one hundred and sixty-second performance make Heinrich, that's Faustus, be careful. Let him not sign with his  blood, let him marry me, let us make love, let the lights be switched off, let our children without strings and wires sing unknown songs, resounding among the paper treetops. I know it's only a play. But only a play is stronger than damnation.
Secluded, solitary on some underbough  Or cradled in a leaf, 'mid glimmering light, Like Puck thou crouchest: Haply watching how  The slow toadstool comes bulging, moony white,  Through loosening loam; or how, against the night, The glow-worm gathers silver to endow  The darkness with; or how the dew conspires  To hang at dusk with lamps of chilly fires   Each blade that shrivels now. O vague confederate of the whippoorwill,  Of owl and cricket and the katydid! Thou gatherest up the silence in one shrill  Vibrating note and send'st it where, half hid  In cedars, twilight sleeps each azure lid Drooping a line of golden eyeball still.   Afar, yet near, I hear thy dewy voice  Within the Garden of the Hours apoise   On dusk's deep daffodil. Minstrel of moisture! silent when high noon  Shows her tanned face among the thirsting clover And parching meadows, thy tenebrious tune  Wakes with the dew or when the rain is over.  Thou troubadour of wetness and damp lover Of all cool things! admitted comrade boon  Of twilight's hush, and little intimate  Of eve's first fluttering star and delicate   Round rim of rainy moon! Art trumpeter of Dwarfland? does thy horn  Inform the gnomes and goblins of the hour When they may gambol under haw and thorn,  Straddling each winking web and twinkling flower?  Or bell-ringer of Elfland? whose tall tower The liriodendron is? from whence is borne  The elfin music of thy bell's deep bass,  To summon Fairies to their starlit maze,   To summon them or warn.
Holding the naked body I had bought Half gingerly, my chin upon her shoulder, And gently shuddering in her arms, I thought: &lsquo;We choose the easier way as we grow older. &lsquo;Ten minutes till the cinema begins, And time to still the hollow vessel's grief, Buy off the dream of sorrow; all my sins Shock easily upon this cushioned reef, &lsquo;And all desires seem captious and remote: On a calm swell, without the grief of wishing, I bob in sunlight with my little boat, And hardly notice where my thoughts are fishing ... &lsquo;What could they dredge from all that sea, but love? Those I desired and laid my hands upon: Those me desiring whom they could not move: And those desired, but not by me touched, gone. &lsquo;What matters, whom I wrote my sonnets to, Whose letters hurt me, who disturbed my dreams? I do not think I find them here in you. I find myself, which matters more, it seems. &lsquo;I do not think my shillings buy your love. What should she care about her customer, Who knows, whatever he is thinking of, He is not thinking specially of her? And yet I think you do not wish me ill, So unexacting in your arms I lie, So gently leave the voyage to your will, Till the craft capsize and the steersman die ... &lsquo;Why think, indeed? The body knows the story: A single shudder brings the boat to wreck. Purged of all ecstasies, I feel no more ... I Lightly with dry lips brush your placid neck.&rsquo;
Out of this seemliness, this solid order, At half-past four to-day, When down below Geraniums were bright In the contented glow, Whilst Williams planted seedlings all about, Supremely geometrically right In your herbaceous border, You had to go Who always liked to stay. Before Louisa sliced the currant roll, And re-arranged the zinnias in the bowl, All in a rhythm reachless by modernity, Correct and slow, And brought the tea and tray, At half-past four on Friday you went out: To the unseemly, seemly, Dateless, whole Light of Eternity You went away.
Between a bronze turtle and a stone bird, the wooden Adam and Eve, carved with a chainsaw out of old telephone poles, stand sap-stained in this flowerless garden, ringed with the years of the trees they came from transformations ago. I wonder if they remember their lost leaves or the voices that flew swifter than starlings from telephone pole to telephone pole, those cruciform shapes lining the hills of the country like stations of the cross. It is early November. This silence between fall and winter will be brief as the pause between movements of music when we listen with all our attention but may not applaud. I think of the voices lost since last winter. Sometimes loneliness is so palpable it becomes a presence of its own, a kind of company. Eden is lost each time a child slides through the torn gates of its mother's thighs. But here in an invented garden I find a bestiary waiting to be named: a wire cobra; a turtle patient as bronze; the stone wings of a bird ready to fly.
I loved the wood because I found in it Mushrooms, berries, beetles, birds and other words, Hedgehogs, squirrels, memories, quarrels, and the damp smell Of dead leaves, and former lives. I reached the first barn  where wheat was stored halfway up the slope of the ravine And saw her dancing, glancing twinkly eyes Full of the hope and love which all thought mean, And slate-green, slate-blue, blue or black like the sunrise Skies, and in their variety and in their sheen I thought that she was looking down at me As if she understood past, present, and futurity.
The first white hair was the first screw coming loose. He took no notice. He smoothed it down with his brush. Now a whole gang of little pubic horrors is springing from his skull at all angles, putting up their hands in class to ask Jim what they're for. Jim doesn't know. He cuts them short. He thinks he'd look more intelligent and smart without any hair at all, so he pulls it out in handfuls and throws it away. As he turns to admire his handiwork in the glass, comic book mainsprings and bells burst from his head like an overwound alarm clock, bringing the house down. See how his long dark hair conceals a curly fright-wig underneath. What a great idea to come as Harpo Marx!
Nothing affects the genius of hope. And the hum of hope keeps you awake at Night; it shouts in your soul And you want to kill it. But hope comes back from its corner. And you lie on the floor turning Your ear away. Still you hear its hum And you think suicide seeing The open window: is it time for you To die? Then heroes tease you and dangle Hope in front of your bloodshot eyes. It's a long way to Siberia and you try to Hide in the wrinkles of your dirty hands. This is the memoir of a master poet, A hermit who was led away and pushed by Hoodlums of hope who did him in. No sleep, just skin, and no sweater; no Love, only the paper-thin skin. It's the genesis of poetry: words Rising like goosebumps as you shudder. Now you got rhythm and mumble words. Each word picked up, kept or discarded, Your lips moving like a guillotine. You shake, you bite your breath, you scream. You are doomed to walk down your shadow Until you come to the end of your Darkness. There you shall quote human Feelings as you touch them in transit.
Some folks think By burning books They burn Freedom. Some folks think By imprisoning Nehru They imprison Freedom. Some folks think By lynching a Negro They lynch Freedom. But Freedom Stands up and laughs In their faces And says, You'll never kill me!
<> Thou dost reproach me with thy sunset look, That in our common menace, I forsook Hope, the last fear, and stood impartial proud: Almost, almost, while ether spake aloud, Death from the smoking stones my spirit shook Into thy hollow as leaves into a brook, No more than they by heaven's assassins cowed. But now thy thousand-scarr&egrave;d steep is flecked With the calm kisses of the light delayed, Breathe on me better valor: to subject My soul to greed of life, and grow afraid Lest, ere her fight's full term, the Architect See downfall of the stronghold that He made.
Jesus, thine eye of pureness doth behold Mine impure filthiness; ah, fie on me! Cover my shame, my soul, for Christ doth see; Out on thine ornaments of woven gold! Alas, long since for pleasures they were sold. Then weep forth pearls of tears to spangle thee, In tears draw forth thyself until there be Sufficient for thee to be enrolled; For as the scorned fly which is surprised Within the drops of amber that doth fall, By this his tomb beginneth to be prized, So he which in his bitter thought's recall, Draweth his soul by penance into tears, His worthlessness to Christ thereby endears.
Creatures of gauze and velvet wings,  With life for one brief day, Dancing and flitting where the breezes fling  The sweets of blooming May; Skimming the stream where the wild thyme grows,  You dart with keen delight, Only to die when the sweet wild rose  Gives perfume to the night. Weary at last, when the day is done,  Of the breeze and clover's breath, Folding your delicate wings with the sun,  You gently drop to death; Glimmering wings and a few short hours  Were yours in sweet delight, Living for a day in the world of flowers,  And then everlasting night. Creatures of gauze and velvet wings,  With a day of gleams and flowers, Who knows in the light of eternal things   Your life is less than ours? Weary at last, it is ours, like you,  When our brief day is done, Folding our hands, to say adieu,  And pass with the setting sun.
If I when my wife is sleeping  and the baby and Kathleen  are sleeping and the sun is a flame-white disc in silken mists above shining trees,  if I in my north room dance naked, grotesquely  before my mirror waving my shirt round my head  and singing softly to myself: &ldquo;I am lonely, lonely. I was born to be lonely, I am best so!&rdquo; If I admire my arms, my face, my shoulders, flanks, buttocks against the yellow drawn shades,  Who shall say I am not the happy genius of my household?
Remember, Dev, the vision in Sackville Street Who shoved a gun in your fist and cried out loudly: &lsquo;Justice, justice!&rsquo; Remember how proudly The longhaired talkers died on their hanging feet So that blindfolded woman might turn her head Just for one last look at them? Did it assuage Their living or their dying when her image Burned through the rag because such men were dead? That was an Eire ago. Did she die With the mackintoshed generals of her liberation Strung up at a lamppost in the English dark? She traipses the backstreet of Ireland unseen by Any Taoiseach. She keeps assignation With the shade of Connolly chained in Phoenix Park.
Longing at twilight the lovesick Adam saw The belly of Eve upon the golden straw Of Paradise, under the limb of the Tree. He thought that none was near, but there were three Who were upon the mortal grass that dusk, Under the wispy cloud, breathing the musk Of the young world. Creature of pointed ear, Of the cleft hoof and the tight-mouthed sneer, The other passed, wound round within his thought. And Adam in his mounting passion caught The white shoulders of that woman there.... All were engulfed these two, the birds of the air, The burrowers of the earth, by the quenchless mind Roaming insatiate on the lowland, blind In its lonely hunger, lusting to make all things One with itself. Brief as the flutter of wings Was his mastery, though ranging through world and void To the dusk-star shining. But all, all were destroyed: The two on the odorous earth in the garden there; The beasts, the birds in the nest, the fireflies in the air.
Morning, clear morning, If only I were your lover! With every step I take on your margin, I should long for you all the more. My word hurries to gather All of your fresh beauty. Here we are, on our path. Let me understand you. Loveliness, held lightly To the blade of nothingness! The blue rosemary Smells of the real earth. How much of the world does the mallow Grasp from her stone? The cricket trills endlessly. I bow to his patience. How much joy the honeybee Leaves to the flower! And he plunges, laboring In the heat of the mine. Now the cricket is hurrying His song. Is there yet more spring? Whoever loses all this, loses himself. So much green, and the field mine! Heaven that the eye cannot fathom: It is love that wins you. Don't I deserve such a morning? My heart earns it. Clarity, uttermost strength: My soul is fulfilled in you.
It must have looked suspicious  Me leaning in from the lane, Spying out house and garden. In the unpoliced doldrums Of the afternoon Light's shifty with pattern. So I wasn't surprised When he came out at last Sharp-eyed, then followed me down (Pretending to stroll But keeping me in sight) All the way into town. He couldn't know I was looking for a stream And a striped verandah awning and six Damson trees run wild. He couldn't know I often Go through his rooms Not as a thief but a child.
When they kiss, she feels a certain revulsion, and as they continue to kiss she enters her own memory carrying a wicker basket of laundry. As the wind lifts, the clothes wrap themselves around her: damp sleeves around her neck, stockings in her hair. Gone her schoolgirl's uniform, the pale braids and body that went anywhere anonymously. Her glasses fall forward on her nose, her mouth opens: all around are objects that desire, suddenly, her. Not just clothes, but open doorways, love seats, Mother's bright red espadrilles kicked off in the damp grass. If she puts on lipstick, she'll lie forever. But she's too nearsighted, you see, she doesn't spot the wind approaching in a peach leisure suit  or the sheer black nightie swaying from a branch. Is she seducer or seduced? And which is worse, a dull lover's kiss or the embrace of his terrible laundry? She'd rather have the book he wrote than him.
Not as the eye hath seen shall we behold Romance and beauty when we've passed away; That robed the dull facts of the intimate day In life's wild raiment of unusual gold: Not as the ear hath heard shall we be told, Hereafter, myth and legend once that lay Warm at the heart of Nature, clothing clay In attributes of no material mold. These were imperfect of necessity, That wrought through imperfection for far ends Of perfectness as calm philosophy, Teaching a child, from his high heaven descends To earth's familiar things; informingly Vesting his thoughts in that it comprehends.
In the centre of the major retrospective there is a door which you open. As you open it certain nerves in the face are jangled artificially: you smile. The smile becomes the property of The Artist. Beyond the door is a room and another door. You walk over to the door. The catalogue says &lsquo;The door will not be locked&rsquo; but the catalogue also is part of The Art. The door is locked. The door you came through is locked. The Artist has served The Art well. As you stand there certain nerves in the eyes are jangled artificially: you weep. The tears become the property of The Artist. You dig to keep warm. The Artist arrests you for digging. The Artist smashes your head for pounding on the door. The Artist prevents you walking to the door. All this is part of The Art. The Artist has refined The Art well.
<> Seeking by roof, by rock, by rise of dead Some country of unsolved birds. Seeking the separate place coast of a shadow without mariner; The way by the rocky daylight borrows and breaks me, The scenery without excursion Of the tended eye. But you, in the very colt and wrack of springtime, Are nowhere else but here; Appearing before the moon as weed or performer  Oh, at sleep, Come into your lonely mirror. Where do I turn, startled, from  Arrive quickly to meet?  Moon, apple and early, High wind over the meadow's foal. And what place keep, that now your face demands me While I depart and depart? We double in doubt, like fish doubling in water: A cage of flying is lost. But now is your candle undespair My closest to clear since sea turned up its pennies: The dark soft in our ears, and the chime of the scatter-mice; And over the lawns, the city of roofs  Flying and flying. Fend the beetles and forks of light from thee. Child, little seal, Sleep in your coveted satchel of sleep.
&lsquo;Twenty to five? It can't be. Do you mean twenty to five yesterday?&rsquo; The hours are pillows, propping us together. I would call it night, the huge small hours. I enter his space-time continuum. &lsquo;For God's sake. This is  We must work hard, form a committee of absence To sort out the affairs of Zing and Bing. How can these villages get their washing done? Land must be purchased, a machine installed, Power-lines laid, teachers and clerics assembled. On Sundays the washing can be blessed out to dry. He restores the King, the Red Kite, in Wales, Foils the egg-and-feather gangs, Brings the lost thing home again. On Smith's farm he works the harvest  Six sheaves to a stook  &lsquo;Long, tall bones and magpies.&rsquo; And, waking on the floor in a twist of bedclothes, Falls &lsquo;into the hands of a remote Scottish Clan Of unbelievable barbarity, who fed me on porridge.&rsquo; We struggle with the dead weight of the living. &lsquo;I am all right, aren't I? I have woken up in my own world, Not in some nightmare system of pipes and sewers? What have I been? I thought I was some sort of animal in the night. I want to wake up and be a man now. You say it's ten, But by the amount of experience that's gone into it It must be at least half-past four.&rsquo;
If in the years to come you should recall, When faint at heart or fallen on hungry days, Or full of griefs and little if at all From them distracted by delights or praise; When failing powers or good opinion lost Have bowed your neck, should you recall to mind How of all men I honoured you the most, Holding you noblest among mortal-kind: Might not my love although the curving blade From whose wide mowing none may hope to hide, Me long ago below the frosts had laid  Restore you somewhat to your former pride? Indeed I think this memory, even then, Must raise you high among the run of men.
Stood there then among spears and kindled shields, praising Orion. Betelgeuse Aldebaran Abstract as future yesterdays the starlight crosses eons of meta-space to us. Algol Arcturus Almaak How shall the mind keep warm save at spectral fires how thrive but by the light of paradox? Altair Vega Polaris Maia Comes walking barefoot Comes walking barefoot out of slavery ancestress childless mother following the stars her mind a star Pulsars, blue receding quasars their vibrant radio waves. Cosmic Ouija, what is the mathematics of your message? (The Nine-Pointed Star) Stable stars, variable stars  hydrogen-into-helium fusions, radiations, spectral fires. And the Nine-Pointed Star, sun star in the constellation of the nuclear Will; fixed star whose radiance filtering down to us lights mind and spirit, signals future light.
By covert way of bugs in bags, and cameras in mikes  and lapel butt- On holes, through scam and zoom in hotel rooms, the  case was open and shut. Editing it, we put a lot of jump cuts in. Otherwise,  you would be watching Paint dry, so to speak. With reconnaissance slice and splice,  what we're about is catching Someone in an icon act of giving or receiving. We  move in on that, Especially when llama trains descend the Andes and  emerge in Laundromat. We've got their bleats all taped, explaining to each other  how the &lsquo;Lima beans&rsquo; Turn into rocks of crack or coke. If you ask me, they're  a bunch of hashasheens. From his black alpaca coat, Inspector Morse took out  his Baedeker and fount- Ain pen. He unscrewed the mosaic tortoiseshell. Then  he wrote this skewed account.
<> Topping the sea of trees with pointed cone, So that from many hills its towers loom, The old ch&acirc;teau of Beaumont stands alone. This generation saw its last sons go To spill their noble blood with humbler men; So Madame lives alone at the ch&acirc;teau And waits for steps that never come again. The sunlight sleeps along the buttressed walls, And on the stagnant moats the midges dance, And in the haunted wood the cuckoo calls, Where hunted once the vanished kings of France. The terraced gardens hum with greedy bees, And Madame walks among the orange trees. Boxed orange shrubs they stand in potted row Along the plaisance Madame takes her ease; But it is lonely at the old ch&acirc;teau; The milky statues glimmer through the trees, So silent, too! What can make Madame start? Down in the garden where late roses blow, She has heard laughter there that stopt her heart Like echoes from old summers long ago. But no it cannot be! For hark! the click Of little peasants' sabots; down the walk That winds among the rows of hedges thick, The children's voices die away in talk. Alas! Who knows, who knows, Why Madame bends so long above the rose? Gently, old heart there is no recompense For the last uttermost you had to give. Yet there is peace for you to outward sense  God gives you Beaumont as a place to live. The white herds graze in stately indolence, While you sit knitting on the terrace there, And that your hands still feel no impotence, Witness the poor and  And sweet the drive home through the wooded park, When faintly chime the far-off steeple clocks At dusk when village dogs begin to bark, And the long lanes go glimmering white with flocks, When the first, steely stars begin to peep And the young shepherd whistles to his sheep.
if i believe in death be sure of this it is because you have loved me, moon and sunset stars and flowers gold crescendo and silver muting of seatides i trusted not, one night when in my fingers drooped your shining body when my heart sang between your perfect breasts darkness and beauty of stars was on my mouth petals danced against my eyes and down the singing reaches of my soul spoke the green- greeting pale- departing irrevocable sea i knew thee death. and when i have offered up each fragrant night, when all my days shall have before a certain face become white perfume only, from the ashes then thou wilt rise and thou wilt come to her and brush the mischief from her eyes and fold her mouth the new flower with thy unimaginable wings,where dwells the breath of all persisting stars
Sunburst of angel from the dark of a thornbush. The spaniel makes a dash for it and has to be held back. It struts in its anklets ruffling on the high wall, storm-blown from the sea, charts erased from its brain. It suns itself on warm stone and takes our hospitality, a dish of sunflower seeds, a bowl of rainwater. Day after day it inclines less to the lost road of the air, tries a small circle on blue, cannot find the thread of wind that brought it. Somewhere the track ran out under its wings. There's something we try to remember, like conscience at the edge of the mind. I try again to read its bracelets but before I'm sure it turns on rose-quartz toes, its eye a ring of fire. Sun runs a finger over its collar of opals. Wind stirs the cirrus of its throat, taking its time.
Well, son, I'll tell you: Life for me ain't been no crystal stair. It's had tacks in it, And splinters, And boards torn up, And places with no carpet on the floor  Bare. But all the time I'se been a-climbin' on, And reachin' landin's, And turnin' corners, And sometimes goin' in the dark Where there ain't been no light. So boy, don't you turn back. Don't you set down on the steps 'Cause you finds it's kinder hard. Don't you fall now  For I'se still goin', honey, I'se still climbin', And life for me ain't been no crystal stair.
&amp; then the come of it (the whole world out there not the mingiest flyer soaring Mitsubishis of nostalgia down into the craven lagoons of our protection leach-field, to dehydrate the shit &amp; shift the water into our time-transformer, big ion-column Earth, the Changer, we have come here to be changed, to be fucked over &amp; fuck not out of desire but to reform the dreaded papacy of interstellar spaces those stellar yokels, these Idis who yoke us down sub jugum, to come onto earth was to hunker down under the limbo, to pass bent before conquistador the latest with tailfeathers of pure malice grunting as we bend, he sweats as we labor, Eros is all about labor dont you understand, to love is to be around love is to be here this prong to plug us in be plugged into the colossal keystone cosmos this house of grass. This is what you do: you see her coming &amp; want to climb on but instead you stand up in front of a crowd of workers &amp; you say Love it's wonderful but first we've got to organize &amp;  you're breaking those big sky bosses.
The sidewise cant of their ears their bedslat skinny flanks their flaccid tails laid flat tell you these are Standardbreds bought off the track and tied to stand all market day in a nagging refrain of flies while rosy Amish women brooding their stair-step children lean over planked tables to hawk homemade blood sausages in their captive succulence. You are the tourist in upstate PA who buys a peck of windfall apples and tempts, palm flat, the bitted creatures who have never been hand-fed before who wait to trot nine miles home over the stinging asphalt living acceptable engines that draw the pillowed Amish in their bonnets and buttoned-over pregnancies inside the square black box on wheels.
<> But hungry time demands their fruit of me, And I alone possess my wasted hours, Which are the children of infinity. I dare rejoice that I have offered gifts To many a deity of wood and clay, And many a house have built where sea sand drifts, And many a ship lost on the ocean-way. I dare rejoice at trespassing and tears And at the doomed Niagaras of the soul That, flowing faster as the chasm nears, Go down in thunder, knowing not their goal; For by their depth of wastage I can tell How deep the source, how inexhaustible.
My Lady clad herself in grey,  That caught and clung about her throat; Then all the long grey winter day  On me a living splendour smote; And why grey palmers holy are,  And why grey minsters great in story, And grey skies ring the morning star,  And grey hairs are a crown of glory. My Lady clad herself in green,  Like meadows where the wind-waves pass; Then round my spirit spread, I ween,  A splendour of forgotten grass. Then all that dropped of stem or sod,  Hoarded as emeralds might be, I bowed to every bush, and trod  Amid the live grass fearfully. My Lady clad herself in blue,  Then on me, like the seer long gone, The likeness of a sapphire grew,  The throne of him that sat thereon. Then knew I why the Fashioner  Splashed reckless blue on sky and sea; And ere 'twas good enough for her,  He tried it on Eternity. Beneath the gnarled old Knowledge-tree  Sat, like an owl, the evil sage: &lsquo;The World's a bubble,&rsquo; solemnly  He read, and turned a second page. &lsquo;A bubble, then, old crow,&rsquo; I cried,  &lsquo;God keep you in your weary wit! &lsquo;A bubble have you ever spied  The colours I have seen on it?&rsquo;
<> The bee with his yellow coat, Is humming a drowsy chanting, A honey-perfumed chanting Of the June-tide blossoming. The spokes of the whirling wheel, The belts in the dapple dusk, Through dizzy measures reel While white, strained fingers feel, Like animated steel. O child eyes, O child eyes, You do not know the hills Or the hope of sun-swept fields And the nodding daffodils Of morning in the skies. O tired eyes, O tired eyes, Your sad gaze dreams of nought; You do not see how summer flies, Or care that daily dies The sun, that it may rise. That clown of the daisy's ring, The bee with his yellow coat, Is humming a drowsy chanting  Mad shuttles drown his chanting! Quick!Time and Death are coming!
That the perceiver pause, his passion treasured in a searching eye, I call from this dry place to the unfeeling urn whose figured eyelids tremble, That this cold statue to a man may laugh at its identity, Marvelling how shedding of hot blood becomes a theme for marble. Where like a veil the tantalizing web of secret misery is hung, Violence of battle glitters in stone eye and quiet tongue. From this time's sand and theft I call to the great Givers, From this dry tongue of time I call to the two rivers. O, he is still as water where the sand flies. He is standing there, I see him pause: I have stood still in the temple of your eyes Where the cruel light flows suddenly back from us To the still room, the proportions of the vase.
The date of death is chiseled on these rows of crumbling headstones. Open! Says God the dentist, but who can solve the mysteries of the mouth, its strict commandments? The novocained jaw grows heavy, more opulent than speech. Will its seeds scatter like Indian corn to sow our graves? Will some chieftain dance, a necklace of my teeth circling his throat, while elsewhere my grandson's son sleeps, a single tooth hidden in the moist cave of his mouth, its milky light the only candle left?
This is, indeed, neither the time nor the place For victory celebrations. Victory over what? Over Death, his grinning image and manifesto Of which, as children, we have been forewarned And offered a corpse's frigid hand to kiss. Contrariwise, let me raise this unsteady glass In a toast to Death, the sole deviser of life, Our antenatal witness when each determined Sex, colour, humour, religion, limit of years, Parents, place, date of birth  A full conspectus, with ourselves recognized As viable capsules lodged in the fifth dimension, Never to perish, time being irrelevant, And the reason for which, and sole excuse, is love  Tripled togetherness of you with me.
O well for him that loves the sun, That sees the heaven-race ridden or run, The splashing seas of sunset won,  And shouts of victory. God made the sun to crown his head, And when death's dart at last is sped, At least it will not find him dead,  And pass the carrion by. O ill for him that loves the sun; Shall the sun stoop for anyone? Shall the sun weep for hearts undone  Or heavy souls that pray? Not less for us and everyone Was that white web of splendour spun; O well for him who loves the sun  Although the sun should slay.
I have heard the wind on a winter's night,  When the snow-cold moon looked icily through My window's flickering firelight,  Where the frost his witchery drew: I have heard the wind on a winter's night, Wandering ways that were frozen white,  Wail in my chimney-flue: And its voice was the voice, so it seemed to me,  The voice of the world's vast misery. I have heard the wind on a night of spring,  When the leaves unclasped their girdles of gold, And the bird on the bough sang slumbering,  In the lilac's fragrant fold: I have heard the wind on a night of spring, Shaking the musk from its dewy wing,  Sigh in my garden old: And it seemed that it said, as it sighed above, &ldquo;I am the voice of the Earth's great love.&rdquo; I have heard the wind on a night of fall,  When a devil's-dance was the rain's down-pour, And the wild woods reeled to its demon call,  And the carpet fluttered the floor: I have heard the wind on a night of fall, Heaping the leaves by the garden wall,  Weep at my close-shut door: And its voice, so it seemed, as it sorrowed there, Was the old, old voice of the world's despair. I have heard the wind on a summer night,  When the myriad stars stormed heaven with fire, And the moon-moth glimmered in phantom flight,  And the crickets creaked in choir: I have heard the wind on a summer night, Rocking the red rose and the white,  Murmur in bloom and brier: And its voice was the voice, so it seemed to me,  Of Earth's primordial mystery.
Humming like a hawk in motion, high afternoon recedes, flying back into the very hole of night that was its birth canal. O beautiful, dutiful womb of arrivals and departures, of light staying still while our eyesight does the moving. Day in, day out, this story has its way of getting told. In countless ways the days spread their wings and fold. I'm left out of the fold of time, aching to release my useless clutch and longing for the touch that'll shatter the heart of matter. Over the course of more midnights and noons than I can hold in focus, the terribly little I've learned is this; that I, like the bird of time, know almost next to nothing except this living moment, feathered with down, that sails up and away with every palpitation of its breast. The rest is pure deception in a sky where Monday masqueraded as Friday or Sunday passes itself off as Wednesday at the tock of a clock. On moment's notice the color of time's plumage changes the way the beautiful changes ring, seeming to chime wrong from right but always mixing day with night. The wing is on the bird, the bird is on the wing. Neither makes sense since never has there been anything more airborne or flighty than this eternal now I seem to keep calling yesterday, tomorrow or intimate today.
King Henry the Eighth was a noble monarch; He had great amplitude of stomach. He sat upon his broad-beamed arse And rollicked out this pretty curse: &ldquo;Down with all papists, Dons and Dutchmen, And up with Englishmen and such men! And also up with English women, For my wife Kate is such a lemon!&rdquo; Each year he spiced his marriage muddle By trade-in for a newer model. King Henry was a hungry bastard: He ate a hawgbone dipped in mustard. He loved to swallow plates of garlic And scatter long deep breaths in public. And how he lapped and bowsed his liquor, Laced up with sassafras and lacquer! And what a most amusing story, O! When he met up with Queen Victoria! There she was quietly mumbling a benison With a couple of friends and Alfred Tennyson, When who should hail this pious foursome But old King Henry and a whoresome. (Do read the gist of their conversation In last week's issue of the  Up tankards then for old King Harry! Bad he was, but he was merry!
We have lived in this town, have disappeared on this prairie. The church always was smaller than the grain elevator, though we pretended otherwise. The houses were similar because few of us wanted to be different or estranged. And the sky would never forgive us, no matter how many times we guessed upwards in the dark. The sky was the prairie's double, immense, kaleidoscopic, cold. The town was where and how we huddled against such forces, and the old abandoned pickup on the edge of town was how we knew we had gone too far, or had returned. People? Now we can see them, invisible in their houses or in their stores. Except for one man lounging on his porch, they are part of the buildings, they have determined every stubborn shape, the size of each room. The trailer home with the broken window is somebody's life. One thing always is more important than another, this empty street, this vanishing point. The good eye knows no democracy. Shadows follow sunlight as they should, as none of us can prevent. Everything is conspicuous and is not.
When Milton  are we sure the ghost's wife 1 or 2? Does knowing it's himself beneath the paint make the Rembrandts truer or less true? <> they'll say,  <> Mi dad's did scan, like yours do, many times! <> <> <> <> We  and there  I'm guilty, and the way I make it up 's in poetry, and that much I confess.
The leaded, wiggly glass lives in its human length as the squall, unpredicted, slams me down late at night to see what in the world goes on wailing. We have no lights. Lightning like a girl's grin stands me dead center of the parlor. It's maples. This house has its jitters yet. It's unreconstructed, two claw-footed bathtubs, taps that won't turn off, doors refining their frames. Often they danced here. Stars on the tin roof marked the place from near hills, settling as thick as a shawl on a woman shaken awake. It was only memory, but she woke her sisters anyway. They stood on linoleum. Glass rattled and pipes clanged. A bad storm, couldn't they see that? Ice, then snow. The maples no one could bear cutting down, dangerous now, raked the roof. Stars turned to ice, blinding the glass. Can you see them, trying to sing as you would? Cold swirls at the feet, dull yellow, naked as planked maple. Water in the pipes forms red-streaked and pearl nails.
High-dwelling 'bove the people here, Being alone with beauty most the while, Lonely? How can I be, Having mine own great thoughts for paladins Against all gloom and woe and every bitterness? Also have I the swallows and the sunset And I see much life below me, In the garden, on the waters, And hither float the shades of songs they sing To sound of wrinkled mandolin, and plash of waters, Which shades of song re-echoed Within that somewhile barren hall, my heart, Are found as I transcribe them following.
She lifts the two boys on the overturned rowboat, a galley plank as a slide; gummy paint on the underside sticks to their shoes; as they walk the eggshell white blackens the swaying birch boat. She lifts cracked plaster, glass, rock from the foundation, hunting for nails, her pigtailed sway the break of oars beating the lake overturned; she works for new grass that springs up, the three oaks burned to death in winter, mistook victims of our rubbish pile. A hundred-gallon garbage can freezes in its burned tracks; a wire cylinder holds our burned paper; near the chain fence we chew the burned oak with a two-man saw. In the attic is an old bed; I hear its thumping as I watch her leafing seeds to the hoed land in foot-deep holes in our thawing ground, trees that must grow in gravel. We begin to live in the old way: fertile eggs in a poaching tin, cooked meal, kneaded bread rising on the open-air rack, stumps at our garden table. As the spring thaws she plants, uncovers, hoes, digs for the rich earth; in gravel we take up the saw; in the old way we cut dead oak.
My brother was afraid, even as a boy, of going blind so deeply that he would turn the dinner knives away from,  he said, as they lay on the kitchen table. He would throw a sweatshirt over those knobs that lock the car door from the inside, and once, he dismantled a chandelier in the middle of the night when everyone was sleeping. We found the pile of sharp and shining crystals in the upstairs hall. So you understand, it was terrible when they clamped his one eye open and put the needle in through his cheek and up and into his eye from underneath and left it there for a full minute before they drew it slowly out once a week for many weeks. He learned to,  to  breaking up green in his head, as the other eye, still blue and wide open, looked and looked at the clock. My brother promised me he wouldn't die after our father died. He shook my hand on a train going home one Christmas and gave me five years, as clearly as he promised he'd be home for breakfast when I watched him walk into that New York City autumn night.  and he was he did come back. And five years later he promised five years more. So much for the brave pride of premonition, the worry that won't let it happen. You know, he said, I always knew I would die young. And then I got sober and I thought, OK, I'm not. I'm going to see thirty and live to be an old man. And now it turns out that I am going to die. Isn't that funny?  One day it happens: what you have feared all your life, the unendurably specific, the exact thing. No matter what you say or do. This is what my brother said: Here, sit closer to the bed so I can see you.
<> In the trees the wind-witch cries; By her sieve the rain is sifted, And the clouds at times are rifted By her mad broom as she flies.  Love, there's lightning in the skies, Swift, as, in your face uplifted, Leaps the heart-thought to your eyes. Little face, where I can trace Dreams for which those eyes are pages, Whose young magic here assuages All the heart-storm and alarm. Now the thunder tramples slowly, Like a king, down heaven's arc; And the clouds, like armies wholly Vanquished, break; and, white as moly, Sweeps the queen moon on the dark.  Love, a bird wakes; is't the lark?  Sweet as in your bosom holy Sings the heart that now I hark. All my soul  That young song I hear it singing, Calm and peace for ever bringing To my heart's storm and alarm.
Close de book, Maria Jane! Let's go walkin' down de lane. Daih we'll hyeah a sweetuh song Dan we kin f'om minstrel throng; Daih we'll hyeah de mockin' bu'd Tellin' robin 'bout de bu'd Dat chu'ps sweetes' in de June. Daih we'll see de face ob noon Shinin' in de bubblin' stream, Brightuh dan an angel gleam. What's de use o' readin' now W'en behin' ol' Mastah's plow We kin walk wid Gawd Hisse'f, Drinkin' in ol' Natur's bre'f?
It's all long steps and pauses, where the woman uses  the man as a crutch; Ironically, it is unlikely that it comes from the Latin  verb &lsquo;to touch&rsquo;. It is not the foxtrot nor the frug, still less the polka-dot  or rigadoon; Zapateado, tarantella, rhumba, mambo, allemande, it's not.  It is a swoon Of music, castanetted by the clicking silver buttons  of the square bandoneon, Which is its instrument, bass-and-treble toned  like the chameleon: Beautiful gloomy levity of camouflage, like when  the girl's bolero Creaks against the moustachioed starched shirt, as he  struts and pansies in torero Mode. He leans into her quickstep jitterbug. Her legs  are all akimbo As he shimmies lower, lower, entering the possibility  of limbo.
I am your stone. I seek the center. Lean back, bend over, I know one way. You cannot move. I weigh. I weigh. I am your doom. Your city shall not burn. The flood has gone by, the fever passed. Get home. Empty the square As your hearts are empty. Only I am there. Everywhere. I bring all things down. Your eyes wander to the ground. You yearn for density, the solid, You want blocks, you want the hardest matter: Clay will not do; granite, not marble. Your souls crave no room. All is brought together. You shall be as stone and wedge yourselves down. Where all things are one.
All your life you may have borne the gift and never known you had it in your nature because no one ever showed you how to bring it forth: take a forked branch of willow or apple almost any soft wood will do grasp both ends firmly but without pressure like lightly held reins now stretch your arms out in front of you at shoulder height a sleep walker where are you leading where are you being led keep walking until the branch of its own accord turns within your hands and the fork points down to the ground here a well can be dug here under this dry surface water flows here you are in life-giving luck the gift of divining has nothing to do with the fates or witches or maidens or wise old crones the gift of divining is human and can happen to every sex only you cannot use force or hold back you cannot make the wood bend to your will you do not control it you only belong to it crossing the boundary between the strangeness of your body and the sameness of this other that you are touching with your arms outstretched and so you are able to feel the branch turning freely the center beckoning where the well can spring and you know how deep you have to go
Where shall we go? Where shall we go who are in love? Juliet went to Friar Laurence's cell but we have no rest  Rainwater lies on the hard  the morning sky But where shall we go? We cannot resolve ourselves into a dew nor  Shall we postpone it to Eternity? The dry heads of the goldenrod turned to stiff ghosts jerk at their stalks signaling grave warning. Where shall we go?  The movement of benediction does not turn back the cold wind.
These things are available only to children only remembered as in the alphabet of midnight dreams: the pale smell of peppermint in a crotch of moldy bricks, zebra striped spiders spinning in sunlight with childblood on their fingers, a father risen as king his thatched hair flaming through a crown and the smoke in his eyes like yellow tears for a lost child.
<> He watched the clash of seed and soil. Incuriously, with slow intent, He set his hands and back to toil. He watched earth labor and give forth; Unshaken, he delivered her, And measured each field's double worth In terms of crop and thistle-burr. Let yield be fair, he smiled. Let weeds Be plentiful, he laughed and took Two handsful of his next-year's seeds And scattered them upon the brook, Insisting earth had no desire For planting other than her own Which brought, from shoots, hill-maple fire, And star-moss out of pastured stone.
And on certain nights, maybe once or twice a year, I'd carry the baby down and all the kids would come all nine of us together, and we'd build a town in the basement from boxes and blankets and overturned chairs. And some lived under the pool table or in the bathroom or the boiler room or in the toy cupboard under the stairs, and you could be a man or a woman a husband or a wife or a child, and we bustled around like a day in the village until one of us turned off the lights, switch by switch, and slowly it became night and the people slept. Our parents were upstairs with company or not fighting, and one of us it was usually a boy became the Town Crier, and he walked around our little sleeping population and tolled the hours with his voice, and this was the game. Nine o'clock and all is well, he'd say, walking like a constable we must have seen in a movie. And what we called an hour passed. Ten o'clock and all is well. And maybe somebody stirred in her sleep or a grown up baby cried and was comforted ... Eleven o'clock and all is well. Twelve o'clock. One o'clock. Two o'clock ... and it went on like that through the night we made up until we could pretend it was morning.
It's something you say at your peril. It's something you shouldn't contain. It's a truth for the dark and a pillow. Turn out the light and I'll explain. It's the obvious truth of the morning Bitten back as the sun turns to rain, To the rain, to the dark, to the pillow. Turn out the light and I'll explain.  It's what I was hoping to tell you.  It's what I was hoping you'd guess.  It's what I was hoping you   Or you wouldn't mind.  It's a kind  Of hopelessness. It's the hope that you hope at your peril. It's the hope that you fear to attain. It's the obvious truth of the evening. Turn out the light and I'll explain.
Some nights I go out and piss on the front lawn as a form of freedom liberty from porcelain and plumbing and the Great Beyond beyond the toilet and the sewage works. Here is the statement I am trying to make: to say I am from a fierce bloodline of men who made their water in the old way, under stars that overarched the North Atlantic where the River Shannon empties into sea. The ex-wife used to say, &ldquo;Why can't you pee in concert with the most of humankind who do their business tidily indoors?&rdquo; It was gentility or envy, I suppose, because I could do it anywhere, and do whenever I begin to feel encumbered. Still, there is nothing, here in the suburbs, as dense as the darkness in West Clare nor any equivalent to the nightlong wind that rattles in the hedgerow of whitethorn there on the east side of the cottage yard in Moveen. It was market day in Kilrush, years ago: my great-great-grandfather bargained with tinkers who claimed it was whitethorn that Christ's crown was made from. So he gave them two and six and brought them home  mere saplings then as a gift for the missus, who planted them between the house and garden. For years now, men have slipped out the back door during wakes or wedding feasts or nights of song to pay their homage to the holy trees and, looking up into that vast firmament, consider liberty in that last townland where they have no crowns, no crappers and no ex-wives.
First thru the blooming fields of hell, among the colored dreams, gay jokes, and gorgeous mistakes our guide had conducted us, to where desire, the dragon of my song, was flaming in his lower parts and tongue; next were we exploring hideous wastes of heaven, by salty pools of loss, spiny anxiety, and sense of wrong, even to the secret sphinx, the wish for death  and here were standing still with bated breath: when suddenly dead, for all our hopes and fears, is our guide across the air and deep: this morning a surprise of anxious tears, a friendly dream now I am asleep.
Windwashed as if standing next to the highway, a truck long as the century sweeping by, all things at last bent in the same direction. An opening, as if all the clothes my ancestors ever wore dry on lines in my body: wind-whipped, parallel with the ground, some sleeves sharing a single clothespin so that they seem to clasp hands, seem to hold on. And now that I can see up the old women's dresses, there's nothing but a filtered light. And now that their men's smoky breath has traversed the earth, it has nothing to do with them. And now that awkward, fat tears of rain slap the window screen, now that I'm naked too, cupping my genitals, tracing with a pencil the blue vein between my collar bone and breast, I'll go to sleep when I'm told.
snow)says!Says over un graves der,speaking (says.word Less)ly(goes folds?folds)cold stones(o-l-d)names aren'ts )L iv es(c omeS says)s;n;o;w(says W I elds) un forgetting un. der(theys)the :se!crumbs things?Its noyesiyou he-she (Weres
<> Did you drink blood, while you drank the salt deep? Or see through the film of light, that sharpened your rage with its stare, a shark, dolphin, turtle? Did you not see the Cat who, when Thor lifted her, unbased the cubic ground? You would drain fathomless flagons to be slaked with vacuum  The sea's teats have suckled you, and you are sunk far in bubble-dreams, under swaying translucent vines of thundering interior wonder. Eagles can never now carry parts of your body, over cupped mountains as emblems of their anger, embers to fire self-hate to other wonders, unfolding white, flaming vistas. Fishes now look upon you, with eyes which do not gossip. Fishes are never shocked. Fishes will kiss you, each fish tweak you; every kiss take bits of you away, till your bones alone will roll, with the Gulf Stream's swell. So has it been already, so have the carpers and puffers nibbled your carcass of fame, each to his liking. Now in tides of noon, the bones of your thought-suspended structures gleam as you intended. Noon pulled your eyes with small magnetic headaches; the will seeped from your blood. Seeds of meaning popped from the pods of thought. And you fall. And the unseen churn of Time changes the pearl-hued ocean; like a pearl-shaped drop, in a huge water-clock falling; from  Waters received you. Waters of our Birth in Death dissolve you. Now you have willed it, may the Great Wash take you. As the Mother-Lover takes your woe away, and cleansing grief and you away, you sleep, you do not snore. Lie still. Your rage is gone on a bright flood away; as, when a bad friend held out his hand you said, &ldquo;Do not talk any more. I know you meant no harm.&rdquo; What was the soil whence your anger sprang, who are deaf as the stones to the whispering flight of the Mississippi's rivers? What did you see as you fell? What did you hear as you sank? Did it make you drunken with hearing? I will not ask any more. You saw or heard no evil.
This trumpeter of nothingness, employed To keep our reason full and null and void: This man of wind and froth and flux will sell The wares of any who reward him well, Praising whatever he is paid to praise, He hunts for ever-newer, smarter ways To make the gilt seem gold; the shoddy, silk; To cheat us legally; to bluff and bilk By methods which no jury can prevent Because the law's not broken, only bent. This mind for hire, this mental prostitute Can tell the half-lie hardest to refute; Knows how to hide an inconvenient fact And when to leave a doubtful claim unbacked; Manipulates the truth, but not too much, And if his patter needs the Human Touch Then aptly artless, artfully naive, He wears his fickle heart upon his sleeve. He takes ideas and trains them to engage In the long little wars big combines wage. He keeps his logic loose, his feelings flimsy; Turns eloquence to cant and wit to whimsy; Trims language till it fits his client's pattern, And style's a glossy tart or limping slattern. He uses words that once were strong and fine. Primal as sun and moon and bread and wine, True, honourable, honoured, clear and clean, And leaves them shabby, worn, diminished, mean. Where our defence is weakest, he attacks. Encircling reason's fort, he finds the cracks, He knows the hopes and fears on which to play. We who at first rebel, at last obey. We who have tried to choose accept his choice. Tired, we succumb to his untiring voice. The drip-drip-drip makes even granite soften. We trust the brand-name we have heard so often, And join the queue of sheep that flock to buy: We fools who know our folly, you and I.
To be the only woman alive in a vast hive of death Is a strange predicament, granted! Innumerable zombies With glazed eyes shuffle around at their diurnal tasks, Keep the machines whirring, drudge idly in stores and bars, Bear still-born zombie children, pack them off to school For education in science and the dead languages, Divert themselves with moribund travesties of living, Lay mountainous bets on horses never seen to run, Speed along highways in conveyor-belt automobiles But, significantly enough, often dare overshoot The traffic signals and  Earning expensive funerals. (These, if at last they emerge From the select green cemetery plots awarded them On their twenty-first death-days by sombre uncles and aunts, Will become zombies of the second degree, reverenced Nationwide in church or synagogue.) Nevertheless, Let none of this daunt you, child! Accept it as your fate To live, to love, knowingly to cause true miracles, Nor ever to find your body possessed by a cold corpse. For one day, as you choose an unfamiliar side-street Keeping both eyes open, alert, not apprehensive, You shall suddenly (this is a promise) come to a brief halt: For striding towards you on the same sidewalk will appear A young man with the halo of life around his head, Will catch you reassuringly by both hands, asseverating In phrases utterly unintelligible to a zombie That all is well: you are neither diseased, deranged, nor  mistaken, But merely undead. He will name others like you, no less alive: Two girls and a man, all moneyless immigrants arrived Lately at a new necropolitan conurbation. <> <> <> <> <> <> <> <> Nod your assent, go with him, do not even return to pack! When five live people room together, each rates as a million  But encourage the zombies to serve you, the honest creatures, For though one cannot ameliorate their way of death By telling them true stories or singing them real songs, They will feel obscurely honoured by your warm presence.
your words drift at the level of faces the language subtle moves like eyes to the tree outside of window and you are talking of Richard Wright to the trees to the ageless bark to an oak that by its own green profusion cannot be hidden and your eyes never drift to the lowest as some have who have been called beggars because they could not count on trees could not count on the undoing of what had been done so well by faces and your eyes motion again to the highest warp in the ceiling to the place of fields not France and Germany where Wright gave and was taken listen to his soul listen to his soul listen to his doleful soul Outsider(out/side/her) but freedom is defined from within we know that Richard come listen to the wind your trees branch overcome with wind the leaves apologize for their indifference and fall and Native Son was the book all had read all on that level in the inside your eyes lecture better than words words I know them well fall with wind but your eyes so stoic reach for that tree at the outside past the corner of 125th Street past the Ivy of universities past the faces you don't know past the face of Richard Wright past the containment of walls of the structure you almost feel free in.
<> Yet I trust Thou art a thing too bright To fall on dust. The angel of the Lord Shall lift thy sword, Servant of the just! Night shall end my night, Yet I pray Heaven spare thy light, Lest lambs stray. Thou remembering me, Mine immortality Lasteth all the day.
I see so clearly now my similar years Repeat each other, shod in rusty black, Like one hack following another hack In meaningless procession, dry of tears, Driven empty, lest the noses sharp as shears Of gutter-urchins at a hearse's back Should sniff a man died friendless, and attack With silly scorn his deaf triumphant ears; I see so clearly how my life must run One year behind another year until At length these bones that leap into the sun Are lowered into the gravel, and lie still, I would at times the funeral were done And I abandoned on the ultimate hill.
After sickness and a begging from her bed my mother dressed herself grey lace-up oxfords stockings baggy on her shrunken legs an orange topper rhinestone buttons and a powder blue straw hat with plastic flowers Then she took the street in short steps toward the corner chewing gum no less she let the family laugh again she wasn't foxy <>
Thank God the manager is blind, the coach is deaf and the owner dead: I am free to completely ignore the ball, I invoke my mental dropsy to communicate to the crowd: they no longer concern me. Breaking into an easy stride, I'm frozen once again in an attitude of unfortunate interior crumbling mouseholes. The ball is hit, impersonal into the gnawing, cobwebby air. I'm feeling naughty and falter like an enormous filing cabinet in an ashen center field. And, like an entangled puppet wriggling at the hairdresser, I chatter before abrupt sleep.
In the waste places, in the sinister night,  When the wood whispers like a wandering mind,  And silence sits and listens to the wind,  Or, 'mid the rocks, to some wild torrent's flight; Bat-browed thou wadest with thy wisp of light  Among black pools the moon can never find;  Or, owlet-eyed, thou hootest to the blind Deep darkness from some cave or haunted height. He who beholds but once thy fearsome face,  Never again shall walk alone! but wan  And terrible attendants shall be his  Unutterable things that have no place  In God or Beauty that compel him on,  Against all hope, where endless horror is.
<> Fluff from your socks has strewn it like cotton-flowers. I pick them, spin them to thread between my fingers. Short threads. Where are you now? Night is not the death of day. It is her lying-in, her waters breaking. Why not stay then? Ease her way? A new day, stillborn, will only multiply our miseries. Night, so you let us sleep  Sluggish, I slow-nibble, stare. When I move, my Master's line moves with me. Far above, he is sleeping like a rock; too drunk to stir. If, as you say, when I feel my  <> <> graciously, two is company, three's a crowd. My friend has broken up with her own friend  and he's no Guide, whose lines might make amends. If guidelines could, I'd give her, as a token  the egg is whole, though the shell be broken. Why should I listen when skin is more persuasive? Or touch, when looking without touching can give a taste of love so unlooked for, and so rare? <>
has a gold tooth, sits long hours on a stool thinking about money. sees white skin in a secret room rummages his sense for sense dreams about Lincoln (s) conks his daughter's hair sends his coon to school works very hard grins politely in restaurants has a good word to say never says it does not hate ofays hates, instead, him self him black self
Hugo's blood, and Katharine's  give these flowers their red  paws of the kangaroo raised in supplication. His note read: &ldquo;I feel my old war head. It's going phut, and that's no good for anyone concerned.&rdquo; Greenmount was saved, where these stalwart stalks were plucked from the slope. On the verandah, under the morning star, warbling magpies were oblivious. Hugo's blood dropped on the jarrah, his service gun snagged on white lattice. &ldquo;The Union Jack on a bolshevik!&rdquo; someone objected at his funeral. And Katharine came back from Russia, to deal with all she had to, raise their son Ric, endure torment. This year the tenant at Greenmount has named her babe Katharine. The fount of life still flows sweet.
<> Of peoples passing to and fro  Where the wan winter sunlight falls Across the grey gates of St. Paul's, A woman of an alien race Stands with a tray of fancy lace. Swarthy of skin with raven hair, A daughter of the Orient there, Wearing her native costume yet Of woven shawl and long head net  And the long Syrian sunrise Looking out from her curtained eyes. The curious, intricate designs Of every lace in faultless lines Of ancient symbols she has made, Turning her country's lore to trade: The Orient's mystic sorcery, In this far land across the sea. Out of the Common sharp and fleet The cold winds blow across the street; And their shrill voices seem to say: Symbols and dreams have passed away  And our wise western world decries All their lost hidden mysteries.
Miss Pickering, like a pickled walnut, dithered among palettes, swam in a haze of thin spittle, shrank behind glass till she attained a precious quality. She coaxed and tutted tiny words of praise, <> and her pearly eyes opened and shut on the big room and swallowed up the class. They would, if they could, have learned from her some grace or delicacy, but colours ran in grey pools over scored lines that represented nothing and were graceless. Their hands remained stubbornly simian. They dreamed of running fingers over a dress or exploring the intricacies of long hair through endless and romantic lunchtimes. The girls themselves were consciously superior. Their bodies moved beyond Miss Pickering answering questions she would never ask. They'd take from her as much of delicacy as they required, then pass on, leave her twittering about the small bones of a leaf, or the lacy complications of flowers. They saw much clearer the powers around them and took larger risks. I think of Miss Pickering dead, a needle in the darkest of haystacks, of filigree, of egg and dart, of finial and crocket and the worrying precisions of needlepoint like white foam stitched to the borders of the sea riding its back astride the slopping paint. It's something, after all, to sidle in and keep a little in so small a pocket.
<> Where grouped forms moved as shadows quietly  Pale as the fog that slides in from the sea At dawn. The air was sodden of a tomb  And dull. A sable judge invoking doom Upon the culprit (So he seemed that sate On the proud dais of the victorious state) Murmured, and two ghosts signed, and fled in gloom.... And there were other things useen. Vague rows Of naked graves that stretched across the lands, White torn homes, and dream-shattered hopeless hands, Starting blind eyes that groped and could not see, And reaching ghastly arms to part the foes  A mute bare cross upon Gethsemane.
&lsquo;If I had the time,&rsquo; said MacMurry O'Keefe, &lsquo;I would change this cold world To perpetual summer: The sun in the sky And each flower in leaf, Each tree a green shade And the grasses grown wild Where each human face Is a happy Newcomer.&rsquo; &lsquo;If I had the brains,&rsquo; and he emptied his glass, &lsquo;War would vanish away As the snow in the street Then black Crime and Despair Like their shadows would pass Into light of noonday On the waves of the sea And the Furies of Night Would fly into retreat. &lsquo;If I had the heart,&rsquo; and he paid for his drink, &lsquo;Peace would flow from my veins Like their rivers of blood And no creature run mad With the effort to think: There'd be no breaks and sprains In the flutter of brains  But my friends would be gone And myself would be dead.&rsquo; Said MacMurry O'Keefe as he walked out the door, &lsquo;Nobody on earth Would be here anymore Which might not be a curse, But a cosmic relief.&rsquo; Said MacMurry O'Keefe.
They said to me, &ldquo;The days are not so far off  When she will come, who gave her heart to thee;&rdquo; And still I wait, while twilight's lonely star, off  Her long-loved hills, dips dewy to the sea. And I recall that night, which gave its soul of  Calm beauty to the earth, when she did give Her love's white starlight to the rugged whole of  My barren life and bade me see and live. The days go by, and my sick soul recalls but  The revelation of that evening sky: The days! whose hours are as narrow walls,  but  Of whiter shadow, where hearts break and die. The day is error's: it can but deceive us  With shows of Earth, blind with the primal curse. The night is truth's: its myriad fires weave us  The thoughts of God, the visible universe.
A parson went out one stormy day To visit the sick in his valley grey. A Romany girl he met on his way With eyes like the radiant dawn of day,  And she lived in the weather all around, all around,  She lived in the weather all around. &lsquo;Oh tell me, parson my love,&rsquo; she said, &lsquo;Where are you going with your sickle head, Your long black cloak from your shoulder spread, And your stoop like a monument to the dead,  When you live with the weather all around, all around,  When you live with the weather all around?&rsquo; &lsquo;When you are as old as I, my lass, You'll learn how the hard years press and pass, For grief is the text and pain is the task, And everyone belongs to the weeping class  While we live with the weather all around, all around.  While we live with the weather all around.&rsquo; &lsquo;And what will you do when your time is done, And you count up your sufferings one by one, And put them in a sack with the string undone For inspection by the Lord and his Ghost and Son  As we pray in the weather all around, all around,  As we pray in the weather all around?&rsquo; &lsquo;Are you a demon or a sprite,&rsquo; he cried, &lsquo;Do you speak out of ignorance or of pride? Look up where the clouds are gaping wide To show you the pillars of Hell inside,  While you laugh in the weather all around, all around  While you laugh in the weather all around.&rsquo; &lsquo;That's odd,&rsquo; said the girl, &lsquo;for I've just come From an angel who was sitting by a pillar of the sun. He blessed me and called me his chosen one And soon I'll be having a pretty little son  Who will live in the weather all around, all around,  Who will live in the weather all around.&rsquo; The parson, he shook off his cloak and hood, He threw back his head and laughed where he stood, &lsquo;Now tell me your name, O my wicked and good.&rsquo; &lsquo;They call me the Lady of Kilpeck wood.&rsquo;   So they danced in the weather of the sun, of the sun,  They danced in the weather of the sun.  They danced in the weather of the sun all around,  They danced in the weather of the sun.
Last year there was no chance. You stared into the empty blue as if into a room you were afraid to enter. So we begin, in a tangle of absences, to know the shapes that wait for us. Now alone in the grass gone green only for us, I wave you away, seeking the right distance until somehow you understand and go and are there, yourself  that I remember and turn away from for the first time. These strokes are easy, just enough to make rise the thing you will lose in sunlight and in fear. I watch how you tumble toward me, the tattering glove of your fathers too large, your face opening at that deceit and the earth's unpredictable, quick skid. A mockingbird sits on a bench to scout whatever moves. He catches more than you do but has nothing to say, having no chance to become the beautiful secret thing you are, calling for more in the high hard sun.
Memory, Mind, and Will : politics, make money &amp; assert yourself use public service use the citizen carry out public policy sell your ideas to the tax payer and you can vote in America without paying any taxes viz there are men with ideas who effect public policy via politicians including leaders of service unions who can tie up distribution there is size to Union which is different than size or more of same, either of which in the present state of these States are no longer as interesting as the admission of politics
What time is it on a face? It is eternity on this one that I try to recall by humming; but I am out of tune. It is the face of the woman in the valley of Sorek. I listen to its adagio. I will make many poems in her honour, all of them failures. Dante, what would you have done? ap Gwilym, Catullus?   I have waited for her to emerge on the pavement of everyday, but the traffic erased her. There must be an exit by which she escapes into those unbuilt areas of the imagination, where sense must give way to thought and thought to repining. I have said on my knees I want nothing of her but to behold her. Is there no place in my mind for her replica to be hung up, so I may visit her at will and replenish my thirst at her sources?  She is life's gage flung down the muse must bend to pick up, never succeeding. I would put her in a boat of clean sails and steer towards an island unvisited by death. But humbler than I, wiser, she is content to walk birdless streets and be served for much money with cheap goods and return with them to a small house, perhaps in this town, and children of human seed.
Because of the spiritual reprisals there was no larger gift than yourself embracing the air, watching the sparrows conjure an ocean in sand. You felt the wind. That was because. That was tomorrow. You sent me a picture of you doing it &amp; there were wild Assyrian queens (understand your hair). Harp &amp; camera, a music round the cup of your left breast, a sea (something like a sea) behind. It is a long song &amp; the snakes twine in the stretch of it, pine needles, a man who loves you watching. I'm talking song (another time I'll sing) &amp; handling some obsessions of you as if they were your flesh. Pretend you hear, pretend you see the snakes dancing to your music, pretend you can hear me now &amp; forgive me please. Also the sea.
Come all ye Rutgers Prep School men and sing our football song, And swell the mighty chorus that will help the team along, Our hearts are true to Rutgers Prep, our voices they are strong, For we must win the game.  Whoop'er up for Rutgers Prep School,  Whoop'er up for Rutgers Prep School,  Whoop'er up for Rutgers Prep School,  For we must win the game. The Prep School fellows take the ball and rush it down the field, The line before them breaks and runs, they know that they must yield, And soon we'll score a touchdown and to all 'twill be revealed That we must win the game. Now let us join together in the good old Prep School cheer, And give it with a hearty will and shout it loud and clear. Let's make those fellows in the field aware that we are here, For we must win the game.
upon mutability if it were possible. But you don't know me. Already you cannot conceive my making the second line of a poem so much longer than the first. No matter, mutability is the topic, and I see you there exiled on the Thracian shore among those hairy mariners speaking an improbable tongue, a location of you damnably similar to Syracuse, N.Y., and I see you addressing your first letter to the new emperor, Tiberius, looking blankly out to the rocks and the gray ocean as you search for rhythms and awesome words to make this the greatest verse-epistle ever written and obtain your pardon, your freedom to return to Rome, so long denied by Augustus. Do you know me, after all? But of course, how could you not when my words are your very bones? You speak to me of two thousand years of solitude. Yes, you are writing that letter forever. You tell me how you cannot name your crime because you only suspect what it is and to name it would make it true. You are innocent. Tiberius will not grant you pardon. He cannot. But he can fling those victims, stopped forever wild-eyed in mid-air, off the precipice at Capri! Some powers are always powerless. The change from Augustus to Tiberius, what does it mean, that instant of mutability continuing forever between a death and an investiture? You whisper to me, No pardon, no pardon, no pardon, and the three sprigs of white lilac in the glass pitcher on my table that are slightly, but only slightly, wilted  the stems weakened, the heavy blossom-clusters depending  tremble as if a wind even from Olympus were meandering through the room.
the giraffe must have spoken. They're all pressing closer to hear what she's said. Leopards ease in, cables swaying or taut, goldfish, toads gnarled like fists, their approach haphazard, and otters, most earnest in play, who the less bouyant, disheveled muskrat tags after, snout foaming bubbles, the antelope listen flying squirrels, jack rabbits, grizzly and badger and almond-eyed cattle, the long-tailed cuckoo, huge blue boulder of whale. Cats, drowsy, are leaving their sofas, and wild boar, chickens, iguana, to hear this giraffe, who takes vistas in silence, to hear what would drive her, mutest among them, to try out those sounds that call up in their sounding something  Now will so many animals hungry for words drive her back into silence again?
<> Up the road of Dreams, Where my soul goes wayfaring By the sleepy streams. Heart that sends your memories In the shape of song, To the land of Hope-to-Be, Is the journey long? Nay, companion of my house, In the longest flight, Distance in desire is drowned As the day in night. Heart and soul go wayfaring Up the road of Dreams, To the land of Hope-to-Be By the sleepy streams.
The women of Leh are such  that one night over there, some 3,600 metres high, not far from Tibet, where the Zanskar glitters all day, and at night, the stars, not to be outdone, seem to grow larger, let themselves sink down closer to the mountains while the moon always disappears by midnight, cut off by the horizon, always on the other side of some huge rock one night in that place I dreamt and I saw Gertrude Stein selling horseradishes and carrots. There was no mistaking those shoulders but she fit in so well with her looking-straight-at-you eyes. And yet, even the traditional Ladakhi hat she wore could not disguise her face. She said  with the others, all lined up along the main street  she slapped the head of a hungry rowdily exploring  and I walked back, several times, back and forth, pretending I couldn't decide what to buy. Then she turned aside to talk with the tomato seller, still keeping an eye on the  but there was no mistaking that poise.
Instead of perfectly evading us the power swole and burst like a hazelnut set in the fire, all the while holding shape in his mind, as he wrote to his father Leopold. So it can be. And so then came the unfolding through sketches during the hot carriage rides towards after-dinner card tables, the Prinzessin's, to improvise among the unhearing. But once the Landgrave set down his ivory toothpick, staring at nothing, taken by the modulations, the fragrant stink from his ceramic pipe in trilling swirls, the musketry at Salzburg and Amalia's hair long ago. Those also smolder, also delay within the broadcast efflorescence not wholly held in score or serially decaying minds of those seated in curved rows to listen, there or here or in future, no more than in one stab of the sky zigging down between cool firs rimming the slopes he scanned from the swung carriage, he has been telling me one thing all this while, or in reedy whine of shrapnel off stone at the bend of that road when another brain flared out to sink like his unregistered in the field, hearing it enters between the shoulder blades the river of cloudy light, wet granite, and starmoss dirt.
At Central Station, in the middle of the day, a woman is pissing on the pavement. With her back to the wall and her legs spread she bends forward, her hair over her face, the drab skirt and coat not even hitched up. Her water hits the stone with force and streams across into the gutter. She is not old, not young either, not dirty, yet hardly clean, not in rags, but going that way. She stands at the city centre, skeleton at the feast. Executives off the London train start incredulously but jump the river and meekly join their taxi queue. The Glasgow crowd hurries past, hardly looks, or hardly dares to look, or looks hard, bold as brass, as the poet looks, not bold as brass but hard, swift, slowing his walk a little, accursed recorder, his feelings as confused as the November leaves. She is a statue in a whirlpool, beaten about by nothing he can give words to, bleeding into the waves of talk and traffic awful ichors of need. Only two men frankly stop, grin broadly, throw a gibe at her as they cross the street to the betting-shop. Without them the indignity, the dignity, would be incomplete.
Together we laughed and talked in the warm-lit room: Out now, alone I come Into the street, in the fall of the early night. Shadowy skies, with a pale uncertain gloom, Hover above the houses dim; but bright In wetness mirrored far, Retreating lamps outshine the lingering light. Hazily blue the air, heavy with dews The wind; and before me the cries and the crowd, And the sleepless murmur of wheels; not loud, For a magical softness all imbrues. The softness estranges my sense: I see and I hear, But know 'tis a vision intangible, shapes that seem. All is unreal; the sound of the falling of feet, Coming figures, and far-off hum of the street; A dream, the gliding hurry, the endless lights, Houses and sky, a dream, a dream!
